



          Anonymous, SONG OF THE AFFLICTED
                                Lesotho 1842      Sesotho


 Song ot the Atflicted   is a lament that tails within the nexus of traditional warfare
in Lesotho. Departure for battle involved strengthening rituals meant to discourage
cowardice and celebrate the brave deeds of warriors. Such rituals, and the songs,
poetry, and dances that went with them, focused almost exclusively on men even
though some may have been led by such warrior queens as ’Manthatisi of the
Batlokoa. The songs and poems go by the generic name of “mokorotlo,” which
Thomas Mofolo describes in his novel, Chaka (1925), as songs of men, songs of war.
   Return from battle similarly involved “cleansing” rituals, the purpose of which
was, among other things, to mourn the fallen. “Song of the Afflicted” belongs here,
although it was performed on other occasions as well. Thomas Arbousset, the col¬
lector of this song in 1836, points out that it was “particularly dear to widows,” who,
when someone had died, gathered outside the village to sing and dance it in chorus
to the accompaniment of a goatskin drum.
   Oral literature of this kind borrows freely from accessible communal material, and
even lone oral artists invent and expand their repertoire in response to the comments,
gestures, and exclamations of their audience. Thus they incorporate the group expe¬
rience into their work. Furthermore, various artists sing sections of such texts differ¬
ently. For example, Arbousset notes that the line, “Oh! That I might fly thither,” is
quite elaborate in some renditions:


   Why have I not wings to fly to heaven?
   Why does there not come down from heaven a twisted rope?
   I would cling to it; I would mount on high,
   I would go and live there.


In The Unwritten Song (1966), Willard A. Trask refers to Henri A. Junod’s observa¬
tion in 1913 that the Thonga people, who live on the border between South Africa
and southern Mozambique, perform a similar song, “Oh! How I should love to plait
a string, and go to heaven, I would find rest.”
   “Song of the Afflicted” predates Western influence in Lesotho. The cultural ref¬
erences in it are purely Sesotho, unlike those in the wedding songs from Botswana
that contrast the bitterness of marriage and the sweetness of cakes (see the example
in the final section of this volume). Arbousset collected this song three years after his
arrival in Lesotho as one of the first three missionaries to proselytize there at the
invitation of the king of the Basotho.
                                                                         Leloba Molema


                                           ♦

   Older widows:
  We are left outside!
  We are left to grief!

                                                  Song of the Afflicted         ♦   85
  We are left to despair,
  Which only makes our woes more bitter!
  Would that I had wings to fly up to the sky!
  Why does not a strong cord come down from the sky?
  I would tie it to me, I would mount,
  I would go there to live.


  The new widow:
  O fool that I am!
  When evening comes, I open my window a little,
  I listen in the silence, I look:
  I imagine that he is coming back!


  The dead mans fighting sister:
  If women, too, went to war,
  I would have gone, I would have thrown darts beside him:
  My brother would not be dead:
  Rather, my mother’s son would have turned back half way,
  He would have pretended he had hurt his foot against a stone.


  All the women:
  Alas! Are they really gone?
  Are we abandoned indeed?
  But where have they gone
  That they cannot come back?
  That they cannot come back to see us?
  Are they really gone?
  Is the underworld insatiable?
  Is it never fdled?

                                                Transcribed by Thomas Arbousset
                                                     Translated by Willard Trask




               Kaatje Nieuwveldt, TESTIMONY
                          South Africa 1858      Dutch


In 1858 a woman of Khoekhoe descent named Kaatje Nieuwveldt appeared before
a commission convened by the Cape parliament to hear land claims at the Kat River
settlement in the Eastern Cape. Against considerable odds, she had come to lodge
a complaint of maladministration against the white magistrate, Louis Meurant.
  The 1850s were a time or great turbulence in the Kat River settlement. Indeed,
this settlement had occasioned controversy from the outset. Created in 1829 for peo¬
ple of Khoekhoe descent by the British colonial government on land taken from the


86 ♦ Nineteenth Century
Xhosa leader Maqoma, the Kat River settlement had originally been designed by
colonial administrators as a reservoir ol troops and a buffer zone between white and
Xhosa settlements. Many Khoekhoe settlers, in contrast, saw their settlement as a
means ol restoring at least some of the land of which they felt they had been dis¬
possessed. They also thought that this particular piece of land was rightfully theirs,
because they remembered that their ancestors had lived there before Xhosa conquest.
White evangelical sponsors promoted the Kat River settlement as a showpiece of
 civilized black agrarian settlement. The tensions between these visions had become
unsustainable by the 1850s in the context of mounting struggles over land.
   During two wars between the colony and the Xhosa, in 1834-1835 and
1846—1847, Kat River settlers fought for the colony (of which they were citizens
in colonial law). In both wars, much of the Kat River settlement was burned down
and settlers lost crops and stock. In 1850, when Xhosa warriors again attacked the
colony, many Kat River settlers, like many other colonial Khoisan people similarly
pushed to the limits of loyalty, supported the Xhosa rather than the white colony.
From 1850 to 1853, people from the Kat River settlement thus fought on both
sides in this brutal conflict.
   Extensive dispossession of rebels for treason by the colonial state marked the
immediate aftermath of the war. Land previously reserved for Khoekhoe settle¬
ment (at least in theory, if certainly not in practice) was now opened up for white
ownership and allowed to enter the colonial land market. Two Khoekhoe activists,
Andries Hatha and Hendrik Heyn, successfully argued that Roman Dutch law did
not permit the state to remove land for treason. In consequence a second commis¬
sion of inquiry was reluctantly convened in 1858 to hear appeals for the return of
land and to grant compensation where necessary. Unless individuals had written
title, however, the commission dispossessed them if they had not adequately devel¬
oped their land and house in a “civilized” manner according to the supposed orig¬
inal terms of the land grants. The records of the 1858 commission imply, when
read between the lines, that the magistrate of the settlement, Louis Meurant, had
long indulged in corrupt practices as he redistributed land to whites and helped
define who was a “rebel.”
   Kaatje Nieuwveldt was the daughter of a rebel, July Rooiberg. She herself spent
a week with the rebels (according to her father’s testimony), but returned to
Eland’s Post, where the government had ordered all loyal women, children, and
noncombatant men to convene. In common with other rebels, Rooiberg was dis¬
possessed of his erf{plot) after the war. He appealed for its return in 1858 but the
commission refused on the grounds that he did not have written title and had not
adequately developed the land. After his eviction, Rooiberg went to live with his
daughter, who had inherited the adjoining erf from her husband, after the latter
had been killed by Xhosa troops during the 1846-1847 war.
   Nieuwveldt appeared before the 1858 commission. She accused Meurant, whose
servant she had been, of having first granted her Rooiberg’s erf, but then illegiti¬
mately handing it over to a British settler, Daniel Stewart, and arranging to have her
crops plowed under. In other testimony not reproduced here, Daniel Stewart (also
spelled “Stuart” in the document) and his brother-in-law John Hannah claimed that
Stewart had been granted Rooiberg’s land in late 1854 by the deputy surveyor gen¬
eral, when Nieuwveldt thought the land was still hers. Stewart said he sowed oats in
1855 but did not reap them as horses destroyed the crop. In 1856, he argued,
Nieuwveldt took advantage of his temporary absence to plow and sow her own crops


                                                                Testimony      ♦   87
on the land. Whatever the truth, Stewart certainly allowed Nieuwveldt’s crop to
ripen and then plowed it under. As Stewart approached with his plow, Nieuwveldt
asked him, according to Stewart’s testimony, “Whether I was a man of peace I said
yes, & she then asked me if I was going to Plough up the crops     I said yes   Sc she
replied she would see further about it. In response to Stewart s claim that she had
not objected when he first plowed the disputed land himself, Nieuwveldt returned to
tell the commissioners, “When Daniel Stewart first ploughed that part of the erf
which was open I immediately went to the Magistrate who in my presence told
Hannah to tell Stewart not to interfere with what I had done.”
  In a second case, Nieuwveldt further accused Meurant of failing to do justice in
the case of a conflict between herself and a white neighbor, Jan Andries Buekkes,
over the ownership of fruit trees. The fight was bitter: Buekkes testified that when
he tried to prevent Nieuwveldt’s daughter from picking apples, Nieuwveldt
“replied I must not come and speak as they did not belong to me, and swore at me,
saying the farmers only came in here to rob the Blacks.’
   At the time, as Nieuwveldt’s suit suggests, there was great tension at the settle¬
ment. Deep resentment between whites and blacks, rebels and loyalists, and indeed
Khoekhoe and loyalist Mfengu settlers predominated, as social worlds were
destroyed and power relations reconfigured. Many had lost their families and
goods in the rebellion. Many others had been dispossessed of their land. British
and Afrikaner settlers were moving into the settlement or hoarding land for spec¬
ulation. Nieuwveldt’s testimony points to ethnic tension in the settlement and the
importance of struggles over land. Her deposition also underscores the strength of
mind of a particular individual: At a time of much trouble she refused to be intim¬
idated and demanded justice for herself. The final ruling of the commission sup¬
ported Meurant, and, despite some criticism of Stewart and Buekkes, largely
endorsed their respective versions of events.
   The two cases also tell us something about the position of widows in the settle¬
ment. Nieuwveldt wanted to farm; she indeed turned down a position as a full-time
servant to do so. She used a range of survival strategies, depending on men (includ¬
ing white men) to plow for her and perhaps on the cash income from service. She
clearly considered herself a good farmer, as she contrasted her impressive crops with
Daniel Stewart’s miserable yield of a few oats destroyed by drought. She was embed¬
ded in family networks and took care of kin. She commanded the labor of her chil¬
dren and the support of some local Khoekhoe men. Nieuwveldt had to fight, however,
against men who had the physical means (axes and plows) to invade what she saw as
her property, as well as against the local corruption of the magistrate Meurant and the
wider colonial state, which was determined to break up Khoekhoe settlement.
     Nieuwveldt almost certainly spoke in Dutch (on its way to becoming Afrikaans).
Her text has therefore been triply mediated: by the process of recording in writing
her oral testimony, by its translation into English by the court, and by the interpo¬
sition of questions, which are invisible to the current reader. To take just one exam¬
ple, when Nieuwveldt says she was married to her husband, she is almost certainly
responding to a direct question about whether her relationship had been sealed in a
church ceremony (a question seemingly posed to most female witnesses before this
commission). She is therefore responding here to the concern of commissioners that
she have legal title in colonial law to her land, and that she fulfill white norms of
respectability. Despite these caveats, a sense of Nieuwveldt’s strong personality and
determination to resist colonial encroachment does emerge, particularly taken in


88    ♦   Nineteenth Century
conjunction with the testimony of other witnesses. (Note: Some periods have been
inserted in the often run-on text of the handwritten court translation of
Nieuwveldt’s testimony. Otherwise the punctuation appears here as in the original
document.)
                                                              Elizabeth Elbourne


                                       ♦


I presented a memorial to Govt in which I complained of Mr Meurant the
Magistrate.
   I was an erf holder in the settlement [at Kat River] at the time Mr
Meurant came here—an erf had been allotted to my husband by Mr
Hertzog. No. 10 8c N. 220 Extent 3 Morgen.
  My husband’s name was Brander Nieuwveldt. I was married to him, he
was murdered by the Kaffirs in the commencement of the war of 1846.
  When Mr Meurant came to the Kat River I was engaged to him as ser¬
vant. I told him that I was an erfholder and that I could only engage myself
’till the Levies were disbanded and my fieldcornet should return to his ward
when I would wish to go back to my erf. He asked me whether I could not
get some person to work the erf for me, and suggested Jan Fourie who came
with me to Mr Meurant but said that he could not do it, and Mr Meurant
then said to me “Kaatje then I must take your work upon myself, as a
father[”]; I then agreed to take service with him; after being some time with
Mr M. I told him that I wanted to Plough as it was the season for putting
in Indian Corn (Mealies). Mr M then said that he would provide me with
seed, Plough 8c oxen if I would find Leader 8c Driver; he asked me at the
same time whether I was the only child of my father; my father’s name is July
Rooiberg. He was an erfholder but had forfeited his erf, he is still alive 8c I
know that he has been before this commission to claim it. I told Mr M that
I was the only child. This was in the presence of my father at Mr M.’s house.
He asked both my father and Jan Paardewagte who was likewise present
whether I have spoken the truth 8c they both confirmed it; Mr M. then said
“Kaatje as Magistrate I will give you your father’s erf because he has forfeited
it for rebellion”; the erf of my father was the one next to mine; the second
day after this both the erven were ploughed as far as there was sufficient
seed, Mr M. having provided everything he promised. The seed he gave was
half a bucket of Mealies. I gathered the Crops. I lived for about 6 months
with Mr M. as his servant and then went to reside upon my own erf my
father being with me. The second year Mr Scollings ploughed for me and
the third year Mr Whittle and it was the crop then standing on the erf which
had belonged to my father that Mr M. caused to be ploughed up. There was
on it an acre (strip) of land on which two buckets of wheat had been sown;
also an acre of Barley being likewise two buckets of seed / an acre on which
an acre of Mealies had been sown (a bucket of Mealies) also an acre pump¬
kins on which 5 quarts of seed had been sown; all these things were sown at
the same time but cannot say in what month. When Mr Meurant had it

                                                            Testimony ♦       89
ploughed over the Barley was fit to cut; I had told my son to begin to cut the
next day. Within a week after that the wheat also would have been fit to cut;
the Mealies were not ripe but fit to eat, and the Pumpkins half grown; 6e the
whole of it was destroyed by being ploughed over; Daniel Stewart ploughed it.
Jackalls son of Elias Sauls was the driver; the leader’s name I do not know. I
knew nothing of Mr Meurant’s intentions till my son in law Saul Solomon
brought me a message from Daniel Stewart that Mr M had ordered the land
to be ploughed over. I then went to Mr M.’s office. Mr Gould accompanied
me, and one Flannagin was in the office at the time, there was no one else
present; Mr M. asked me what I wanted, 6c I told him the message I had got
from Daniel Stewart and that I had come to enquire whether it was the truth.
Mr Meurant replied “yes it is true” and he then asked me from whom have you
got the erf of your father. I replied from you Sir. He jumped up 6c said it is a
lie and put me out of the office himself, and I told him that if Daniel Stewart
ploughed my land over, I would complain of him. Mr M-The following
day Daniel Stewart came and ploughed over the land and destroyed the whole
of the crops. Stewart sowed nothing on it but half a muid of Oats the same day
but he never reaped anything because he did not attend to it, 6c it failed from
drought. And since then a Mr J. Hannah sowed one crop of Mealies on the erf
which he has just reaped.
  I have also in my Memo to Govt, complained that Mr M as Magistrate did
not take notice of a complaint which I made before him against Jan Buekkes.
On a certain day I cannot say when I sent my daughter Eva to gather some
Apples from the trees standing on my own erf not on my father’s. Jan Buekkes
who was then living on the other side of the river came to me and asked me
how I dared send my child into the trees for apples without his permission. I
told him they were my trees, which my late husband had planted, and that I
did not see that I wanted his permission. He then said that Mr M the
Magistrate had given him the trees. I replied the Magistrate could not have
been aware that they were mine 6c Buekkes said to shew me that they were
his trees he would get his axe and cut down all ol them; he then immediately
got his axe and began to cut them down. When I asked Saul Solomon and
Jack Andries to go with me and witness what Buekkes was doing I again told
Buekkes that they were my trees, and [he] came towards me and held the axe
up to my head in a threatening manner at same time using threatening lan¬
guage towards me, said he would cut down all the trees and he did cut down
as many trees (apple, peach 6c fig) as there are notches on the stick I now pro¬
duce (47) all fruit bearing trees; he was still cutting the trees when I went to
Mr Meurant the Magistrate and complained of it; after hearing me, he told
me to go home 6c he would send for me and my Field Cornet. Three weeks
had elapsed without my hearing anything of it when I again went to the
Magistrate 6c repeated my complaint. He said he had had so much to do that
he could not have attended to it, but I must go home 6c he would summons
me and Buekkes. We were summonsed, and I with my father July Rooiberg



90   ♦   Nineteenth Century
and the boer (Buekkes) were before the Magistrate, who asked if 1 had any
witnesses to prove that my husband had planted the trees & I named Jan
Skip and William de Klerk. The Magistrate then asked my father who also
told him that my late husband had planted those trees; the Magistrate
observed that Buekkes said they had been planted by David Prins—my
father said that was not the case. Upon this we were dismissed and I had to
go home without hearing anything more about it. Buekkes had at the time
two erven adjoining each other, formerly Jan Rooi’s and Jan de Beer.
   I brought this case before the Governor when he was here when he was
at Eland’s Post (9 February 1855). The trees cut down were all in one row.
   My father joined the rebellion, but I remained at home at Eland’s Post.


                                             Transcriber and translator unknown




                              Emma Sandile,
            Letters and Land Submission
                       South Africa 1860-1883        English


In 1858 Emma, the daughter of Sandile, senior Xhosa chief in British Kaffraria,
was sent to be educated in Cape Town. Her letters stand as the earliest known
writing in English by a Xhosa female. As royals, Emma and her two brothers were
selected to be “hostages for the peace and prosperity of their country,” as defined
in a letter from Robert Gray, first Anglican bishop of Cape Town, to the colonial
secretary in London (University of Witwatersrand Archives, Gray Collection, vii,
1859-1861). This was the period between the Seventh and Eighth Frontier Wars
in the Cape Colony, where the British engaged in battle with the Xhosa for land
ownership and political power. As products of the liberal and Christian education
provided them, first in the home of Robert and Sophy Gray, and then in the newly
established Zonnebloem College in Cape Town, Emma Sandile and particularly
her elder brother, Gonya, who was his father’s heir, were also expected by the
British colonial church and state to have a vast influence over the Xhosa people.
As a potential wife and mother, Emma Sandile had special value as the bearer of
British culture into the African home.
   At sixteen, accompanied by two age-mates as was appropriate for a girl of her
status, she entered Zonnebloem College joining a group of eighteen boys. Besides
the religious instruction meted out to both groups, the girls were at first taught
only cooking and sewing. They mended the boys’ clothing and hemmed towels and
sheets. After a year a trained teacher was hired for the girls, and their education
somewhat improved. Sandile was baptized about six months thereafter.
   As her first letter shows, she begged the governor of the Cape, Sir George Grey,
to allow her to go home for a short time. Her request was refused for fear she might
marry a non-Christian, and there followed a tussle between the bishop and Emma’s
father, who indeed wished her to marry a neighboring chief who had offered a gen¬
erous lobola (bride-price). The bishop prevailed, later arranging Sandile’s betrothal
to Ngangelizwe (called Qeya—his boyhood name—by the government authorities),

                                         Letters and Land Submission          ♦   91
paramount chief of the neighboring Thembu, the most powerful chiefdom beyond
the Xhosa-Cape frontier. Ngangelizwe had shown an interest in Christianity and
with Sandile’s encouragement might have become a useful and loyal link between
the British and the Thembu.
   Despite the interventions of Joseph Cox Warner, resident Thembu agent at
Glen Gray, the marriage arrangements came to naught, partly because Ngan¬
gelizwe ’s people wished him to have numerous progeny and thus more than one
wife, partly because Ngangelizwe wished Sandile to wear not a white wedding
dress but a kaross, her skin to be smeared with red ochre, and her arms adorned
with brass. Writing to her former schoolmistress, Matilda Smart, who had come to
Zonnebloem in 1862, on the occasion of the visit to Glen Grey of the new gover¬
nor of the Cape, Sir Philip Wodehouse, Sandile suggests also another reason:
Ngangelizwe wished to be married by the Wesleyan priest, Rev. Peter Hargreaves,
rather than the Anglican bishop, Henry Cotterill of Grahamstown.
     Sandile’s social position became more and more precarious. After teaching at
St. Philip’s mission in Grahamstown, she married a minor Mqwathi chief, Stokwe,
son of Ndlela, now settled in Indwana in Emigrant Thembuland. She was his sec¬
ond wife (he had probably ten wives in all) but became nkosikazi (primary wife) by
virtue of her royalty. Now quite cut off from the Christian church, Sandile became
alienated from the Thembu as well, who accused her of being an accessory to
Stokwe’s death at the hands of the British. (Stokwe had led an anti-British revolt.)
Sandile’s last letter to the magistrate Charles Levey (recently appointed Thembu
agent after Warner’s departure), followed by her statement to the land commission,
shows her petitioning the colonial authorities for the farmland her husband had
bequeathed her so that she could do what duty demanded in the way of protecting
her children and various cowives. Successful in her claim, and still owning a farm
at Cwaru in the Middledrift district in the Ciskei, she managed just before her
death in 1892 or 1893 to leave land to her four daughters and one son. But she
brought up none of them to be Christians. Following the convention of her time,
Emma spells her patronymic as Sandilli rather than Sandile. (Information in this
headnote is derived from Janet Hodgson, Princess Emma [1987].)
                                                                    Dorothy Driver


                                         ♦

To Sir George Grey, 2 November 1860
My Lord Governor. I want to ask if you please sir to let me go back to see
my parents for a short time and I will come back again I will not stop any
longer. It is because I do desire to see my own land again I beg you to let
me go to see my parents and if you do let me go I shall never for get your
kindness. I should be so please to see my Mother’s face again. I beg you do
let me go my Lord Governor of your kindness I am quite sure that you will,
I cannot do as I like now because you are in my fathers place if you do lis¬
ten to my ask I am sure I do not know what I shall do, because I cannot do
any thing for you, and yoyi can do so much for me.
                                                                  Emma Sandilli.




92    *   Nineteenth Century
To Bishop Gray, 3 January 1864
My dear Lord Bishop,
I write to you as a child to her parents and I am sure I need not called you
any other way but my father. I have been brought under your care, and was
Baptized and Confirmed by your own hands. I am sure I am almost in great
hope that although I am not near you still you could do anything for anybody
nor matter who they are you show your kindness to them even to us black
boys and girls. Really my Lord your kindness to me has been more than my
own father would do to me, and when I think that perhaps I shall see you no
more in this world, it reminds me of those words which you spoke in the day
of our Confirmation and when you turned round to me and said to you my
child who are going back to your own country among the heathens.
  I could cry now only because I am afraid I should perhaps never see you
again both you and Mrs. Gray. She is king hearted, and if you be kind
enough to give my love to the young ladies and tell them that I take great
pride in them which I hope they will always do the same to everybody. I
am not forgotten them yet and I never will.
  And also I wish to tell you that I am glad to see my friends again and
they come in great numbers almost every day to see me and the Bishop
allows them to come. And I am sure he is very kind to me indeed both of
them, and I like them very well indeed. But although I am very sorry to be
away from you, man and woman you can see them coming up and then
they all sit down on the grass, and I must go round and shake hands with
them and you can see them put their hands in their mouths saying how fat
you are what makes you fat? And to let me sit down no they like to see me
stand all the while and when they goes away then they all kiss my hand.
  And as for this young gentleman I come to see, I have not seen him yet,
and by this time I hope to see my home and see all those that I left behind
me which I shall be very glad to see them again here. I am not going to
stay with them not more than two weeks and the Bishop is going to take
me down to see Mr Owner [Warner]. I think that is his name is it not?
  I am your dutiful servant, Emma.


To Bishop Gray, 14 January 1864
My Lord Bishop,
I was very glad to get a kind letter from you because I look upon you as a
father and a child. I am not ashamed to write to you or afraid to say any¬
thing because I don’t see why should I hid it from you, a dear parent to me
like you. Never could I forget you as long as God keep my life, and untill
death may part us both. I would in pleasure write to you when I have seen
Qeya but I have not seen him yet and when ever I see him by God’s Mercy
I will write to you about him and what I think of him.
   Oh! it is a blessing indeed to know the way of salvation and do those
things that are pleasing in the side of God who by his great Mercy gave us
His only son Jesus Christ to die for the whole world that whosoever


                                   Letters and Land Submission       ♦   93
believeth in Him shall never die but have everlasting life. I am sorry my
Lord to be away from you and I know that you are very much put [out]
about me, because I might do as my Countrymen are as you say in your
kind letter and do as they do, because they know not the word of God
which is the bread of our souls, and what would I asked you more than
anything else is your prayer for me and a blessing that the blessing of God
Almighty may be upon me, and your blessing also.
  I am not in the least afraid to write to you because why? because there
is no need of it, was I not brought under your care? Yes I was and I was
also Baptized and Confirm by your own hands and what more could I fear,
when you are my father. I am not afraid to called you my Father because
you allowed me to call you Father. And I hope you will always write to me
because it makes me so happy to get letters from you.
  And also I must let you know that I am going to Mr Owner [Warner]
the gentleman you told me to go to though I don’t think I spelt his name
right. And please let me know if the ladies are quiet well. I don’t mean
every lady in the land which could be found but those I knew in your place
and in Zonnebloem. And also I wished to ask you one thing if you wont
mind me asking you is about my brother being Baptise because I should
like him to be because I am.
   I have not much to say to you only you dont forget me in your prayers
and think about me in the Holy meetings I mean in the Church. And also
I should be glad if you where to tell me what you dont think I ought not
to write, but I hope I have write nothing to displease you and if you tell me
I will try to do better next time when I write to you again if we are all well.
I am sorry I cant tell you how do I like Grahams Town because I have not
been through it only just round a little way and turn back again. And I am
glad to tell you that I am in good health.
   And what do you think my friends want me to do, to put a handchief
round my head because they say I look better than nothing at all. I told them
that I dont want it round my head because I am not used to it now, and I am
sure when ever they comes they say the same thing and I don’t know what to
do!! Oh! but they do make me laugh. And now I must end my long letter,
   I am your dutyful servant, Emma.


To Miss Smart (Emma's former schoolmistress), 26 March 1864
My dear Mother,
I was very glad indeed to get a letter from you, and also I was sorry to hear
that my cat had been sick, and I hope that when you give it away you will
give it to someone who will be kind to it—Mrs Warner’s sister (Miss
Stanford) is teaching me to play on the Seraphine, and I am sure she tries
all she can do for me, and I shall be sorry to part with her now.
     And also I must tell yoh that I have seen the young chief, he is a tall fine
young man, and I must let you know that the marriage is going to take
place. Oh! how I wish that you could be here and see him take my hand


94    ♦ Nineteenth Century
and kiss it, and I love him to, I am sure you would like him if you were to
see him, and you would be quiet amused with him.
  I have got so smart since you saw me. I have golden earrings in my ears,
crochet lace round my petticoats, high heelboots, a net and ribbons on my
head, but I hope I shall never be proud although they like to see me
dressed nicely yet they always tell me that dress must not make me vain.
  I was very glad to see the Governor and his son at Glen Grey, but very
much disappointed that Lady Wode House was not with him. I saw more
Kaffirs on that day than I ever seen in my life they all come on horseback
to salute the Governor, the young chief Qeya was here also and the
Governor was very much pleased with him and the Governor congratulated
me on the conquest I had made and kindly promised to fournish our house
for us and he told me that whatever I needed he would grant it to me and
the Governor also said how much I have grown and how nice I looked.
   But one thing I think will disappoint you, we are not going to be married
by the Bishop, or a Clergyman [Anglican], because Qeya likes to be married
by the Revd Mr Hargreaves, and therefore I cannot do anything but submit
as my future happiness depends on my husband. I think it right to try and
please him in everything that is not wrong. No one here is anxious to change
my Faith, Miss Stanford herself belongs to the Church of England. Mr and
Mrs Brownlee, and the RevdTiyo Soga, are coming to the wedding, and that
will be very soon. Then I hope I will let you know all about it.
   Please give my best love to Warden and Mrs Glover. Tell them that I
will try next time to write a few lines to them, and they must not think that
I have forgotten them. I have not. I still love them as my parents, which
indeed they have been.
 And also I was very glad that you have sent me a copy about your
Mountain School. I can remember it very well. And again you asked me if
you gave me ‘B. Wilson on the Communion’. No dear Mother you have
not, and I shall be glad if you sent me one.


To Charles Levey, 27 September 1882
Sir, I am the eldest daughter of the late Chief Sandile, and the great wife
of the late Chief Stockwe. At the present time I am living under your care.
Though you have been very kind to me and my children, yet you know that
we have no fixed place which we can call our home. Please ask the
Government     Commission      for Thembuland       to   recommend    to   the
Government that I should get a small farm for my children, and the wives
of the late Chief Stockwe. We do not wish to make a native location, but
simply want a small place we can call our own. We wish to be always under
your care and protection.

Submission to the Land Commission, Southeyville, 10 February 1883
I want a place to live on; I have five children of my own, one boy, the others
are girls; the boy is about twelve years of age. After my husband’s death, the


                                    Letters and Land Submission        ♦   95
people of his clan smelt me out, accusing me of being instrumental in caus¬
ing his death. I went into the bush with my mother and Philip [Stokwe’s
headman], who were faithful to me. Since the war I have been living close to
Southeyville, and living on what I could cultivate.
  Petrus Mahongo claims a farm which he says my husband granted to him
in his lifetime. It is situated in Seplan, next to the land claimed by the mis¬
sionaries. I know my husband intended giving him a piece, and came to Mr
Levey about it. My husband did not intend giving him the piece that he
wanted. My husband spoke to me about the land wanted by Mahongo, and
told me that was for me. He also said that he had told this to Mr Levey. He
told me that I was to live on that land. I never lived on it, because Mahongo
placed a Hottentot on it. There was always a difference between my hus¬
band and Mahongo about this land. There were no beacons up, but this was
assigned to me by my husband, the chief, at my request, and in accordance
with our customs. I could never occupy this land owing to Mahongo’s peo¬
ple occupying it. I was waiting for the settlement of the dispute. Mahongo
has never occupied this land himself; he let it to a Hottentot on the Nabus,
and used to send his stock there from the colony. I do not like the place I
am on. I should like the place my husband assigned and gave to me, or suf¬
ficient of it to live on and maintain my family, and be secured in my pos¬
session. I hear Mahongo has a farm in the colony. I know the people of my
husband’s tribe were very angry at Mahongo having this piece of land. They
remonstrated with him, and that is why he did not like giving him the land.




             Urieta (Johanna Maria) Kazahendike                        ,
               God’s Peace and Blessing
                             Namibia 1861      German


Urieta Kazahendike was born in 1836 in central Namibia to one of the many
H erero families impoverished by the conflict between Jan Jonker Afrikaner, leader
of the Nama, and Tjimuhua, leader of the ovaHerero. Displaced people, most of
whom had lost their livestock, gravitated toward the early missions in search of
shelter and employment. Kazahendike was about eight years old when she first
joined the missionaries Carl Hugo Hahn and Emma Hahn, who worked in
Namibia from 1844 to 1872. She attended and later taught in the school estab¬
lished by the Hahns, while working as a domestic servant in their household.
Urieta Kazahendike was the first Christian convert among the Herero. She was
baptized by Carl Hahn in 1858 and took the name Johanna Maria.
     The missionaries were slow to win over converts, and Carl Hahn was hard-pressed
to persuade the Rhenish mission society to allow him to continue his evangelizing
efforts. Kazahendike accompanied the Hahns to Germany in 1860 where she was
quite literally exhibited at religious meetings in Germany as living proof that
Hahn’s missionary work in Africa had borne fruit. Hahn wrote without elaboration
that Johanna was subjected to “many indecencies” during her visit to Germany.

96    ♦   Nineteenth Century
  After Kazahendike’s return to Namibia, she married the widowed Samuel
Gertze, an employee ot Carl Hahn, in 1864, and cared tor his eight children in
addition to the nine of her own that she bore during her fifteen-year marriage.
After her husbands death in 1879 she worked as a midwife and pharmacist until
shortly before her own death in 1936. She is remembered and spoken of with great
admiration and respect today. In 1998 her portrait was used for a special series of
stamps that honored Namibian women of the past.
   Kazahendike was a woman of great linguistic ability: She spoke Dutch, German,
English, and Nama, in addition to her mother tongue, Herero. In Germany, she
continued to be an invaluable but unacknowledged editor and translator for the
Herero-German grammar and dictionary that earned Hahn an honorary doctorate.
She also worked on the translation of religious material from German into Herero
and on a series ot nine Herero books that enhanced Hahn’s reputation considerably.
   Kazahendike’s letter to the Hahns, written while she was waiting to sail alone from
Amsterdam to Cape Town, reveals both her anxiety and loneliness. She had accom¬
panied the Hahns to Germany for an extended period but left only oblique glimpses
of her perceptions of her relationship with the Hahns and her stay in Germany. This
letter survives only in Carl Hahn’s reports (Berichte). The surname Scheudeke that
appears in the signature to the letter is a printer’s misinterpretation of Kazahendike.
                                                                       Diane Hubbard


                                           ♦


God’s Peace and Blessing be with you.
Beloved in God.
Today I went to the home of the blind and was astonished to see their
work, because it was more beautiful than the work of people who can see.
Stockings and other items which they had made were very neat. When
they displayed their happiness, however, my heart was filled with mourn¬
ing. They can also sing very well and two boys played four-handed on the
piano. The girls also sing very well. Now I am staying with Mr Oostmeyer
and the tiny bedroom in which I sleep is very similar in size to the one in
Gatersloh; I also have a similar board for the books here, just like over
there. God has helped me and consoled my heart and dried my tears, and
I thank Him, that He in His mercy has strengthened me.
   I want to tell you something. The night after the day I left you, my heart was
heavy when I lay down to sleep. I prayed and fell asleep. During the night I
screamed loudly in my sleep and woke up; but it was a dream and I was glad
that it was only a dream. Then I fell asleep again and I heard a voice which said
to me: Don’t cry, for behold you have prayed that you want to be comforted.
  Well, Jesus has given me strength, and not only today: He will always
give it, if I just surrender myself to Him. He is always nearby, He is my
leader in death and in life. He satisfies my hunger and thirst. Jesus, make
me hunger and thirst for You and for Your word. Jesus, feed me and quench
my thirst with Your wounds and Your death. Jesus Christ, in Your great
mercy, take me and hold me. You who are the same yesterday and today, in
eternity and in splendour. May He hold you and me. Amen.

                                               God’s Peace and Blessing         ♦   97
     I thank you very much, dear teacher, for your letter which made me very
happy. I received it while I was busy writing to all of you. Yes, I shall always
think of you and put myself in the hands of God, and take my refuge, like
a child with its mother, in Him in all things.
     At the beginning I was very frightened at the thought of the ship; but
now I have put myself in the hands of God and I can say: Jesus, do what¬
ever You please, just let me believe and deliver me from evil. Amen.
     Farewell, very beloved in God. God bless you in Jesus Christ our Lord,
in whom we have salvation, redemption and forgivenness of all our sins.
     Give my regards to everyone I know, the widows etc. etc.; also in
Barmen in the children’s and mission home. The brides send their regards.
     I have forgotten to tell you that I received some written words (by the
blind people) when I went to the home of the blind. I am sending them to
you. Farewell again and stay very, very well.
                                                                 I am your servant
                                                              Johanna Scheudeke


                                                        Translated by Mara Miller




           Eliza M., Account of Cape Town
                          South Africa 1863      isiXhosa


St. Matthew’s Mission, where Eliza M. attended school, was established in the
Eastern Cape in 1854. It was situated at Keiskammahoek in the Ciskei, on the
western side of the Kei River, which formed the border between the Cape Colony
and the independent African territories to the east, during the first part of the
nineteenth century. It was part of a project conceived by two influential figures in
the mid-nineteenth century Cape, the governor, Sir George Grey, and the Angli¬
can bishop, Robert Gray (see texts by Emma Sandile earlier in this section). Their
intention was to “assimilate” and “civilize” the turbulent border peoples through a
program of education, Christianity, and health care. The destruction of African
society would also bring laborers to the growing settler community to the west.
     Eliza M. was probably one of a group of people known in the nineteenth cen¬
tury as “Fingoes” (Mfengu). These were Xhosa-speaking people whose societies
had been destroyed during the turmoil of the early nineteenth century, known
sometimes as the “mfecane.” While they had found refuge in the Ciskei in the
shadow of the Amatola mountains, their right to land and power was insecure. As
a result, they formed an alliance with the British. In return for protection and land,
they accepted the missionaries and were among the earliest African converts to
Christianity in southern Africa. Two of the most prominent African schools in the
Cape Colony, Lovedale Institution and St. Matthew’s College, were established for
them around this time and^produced the first modern African political leaders.
     The legacy of the missions to the indigenous people of the Eastern Cape was a
mixed one. On the one hand their education provided students some access to the
world of the white settlers, as clerks, interpreters, or teachers. On the other hand

98    ♦   Nineteenth Century
the missionaries, who drew little distinction between Christian teaching and
white, middle-class values, imposed a Victorian culture on their students. This was
particularly repressive for women who found themselves trained mainly in wash¬
ing, ironing, sewing, and cooking. The belief of the missionaries that educated men
needed educated wives did, however, open some doors to a few mission women, as
shown by other texts in this anthology.
   The King Williams Town Gazette was published in a small settler town that had
begun life as a military center to protect the frontier. It was one of the many insti¬
tutions that settlers established as a means of re-creating their former European
world. Eliza’s article, probably written as a school exercise, would have been pub¬
lished partly because its naivete was amusing to the whites, but also because it was
proof of the success of the civilizing policies of the missionaries. It was translated
from Xhosa into English by an unknown translator, perhaps one of the missionar¬
ies, and first published in the Gazette.
   Eliza arrived in a Cape Town quite different from the world she had known.
Like other visitors to the town, Eliza was intrigued by the exotic dress of the
“Malays,” often described as the Muslim descendants of the slaves brought to the
Cape by the Dutch East India Company in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
The name was misleading since none of the slaves came from Malaysia, and Cape
Muslim forebears also included the poor of many nationalities who had found
homes at the Cape in the preceding two centuries. The term “Slam” (from Islam)
was derived from the creole language based on Dutch which had developed in mul¬
tilingual Cape Town and was later to be formally recognized as Afrikaans.
   In multiethnic Cape Town Eliza was confronted with the need to define her own
identity. Although Cape Muslims were light-skinned, like many of the Xhosa-
speaking peoples, they were clearly not “Kafirs.” This term did not have for Eliza
the derogatory connotations it later acquired. Although sometimes used for all
Africans in South Africa, in the 1850s it often referred specifically to the Xhosa-
speaking peoples of the Eastern Cape. On her visit to the South African Museum,
Eliza encountered models of much darker-skinned Africans, whose blackness she
called “ugly,” perhaps out of acquiescence to white missionaries’ perception of race.
In Cape Town she did, however, encounter some of her own people, including the
pupils of Zonnebloem College, a school that had recently been established prima¬
rily for the sons of Xhosa chiefs, as part of an assimilationist project, as Emma
Sandile’s letters show. Some of the chiefs themselves, together with their families,
had been brought to Cape Town as political prisoners after their defeat in various
frontier wars. This was why the kindly man thought Eliza a prisoner. Even more
confusing for Eliza was white usage of the color black. Black as a symbol of mourn¬
ing was familiar to her but there seems to have been no attempt to explain to her
the obscure meaning of May Day festivities or blackface as a form of entertainment.
   Eliza’s visit coincided with the celebrations on 15 May 1863 to commemorate the
Prince of Wales’s marriage. As Eliza rightly observed, this was a highly ritualized
affair, serving mainly to reinforce the bonds of Britain’s growing empire. Such
mythic English emblems as Gog and Magog, and Lady Godiva (played by a man),
made their appearance. Despite these efforts to inculcate Englishness, the festivities
did genuinely incorporate most Capetonians in one way or another, unlike com¬
memorations later in the century when racism was a more powerful force.
                                                            Elizabeth van Heyningen

                                           ♦

                                                Account of Cape Town           ♦   99
We left East London on the Sunday, while it was raining; the sea was fight¬
ing very much, and there were soldiers going to England and their wives.
On the Tuesday we arrived at Algoa Bay, and boats came to fetch the peo¬
ple who were going there, and other people came in. The ship went off the
same day. A great wind blew, and I thought myself that if it had been
another ship, it would not have been able to go on, but in its going, it kept
twisting about, it did not go straight, but it went well on the day of our
arrival, for the wind was good. We arrived on the Friday. While I was in the
ship, I forgot I was on the water, it was like a house inside, but outside it
was not like a house. There is everything that is kept at home; there were
fowls and sheep and pigs, and slaughtering every day. I kept looking at the
thing which makes the ship go. There are two horses inside, made of iron,
which make it go; and when I looked inside, it was very frightful. There are
many bed-rooms inside. The ship we were in is named the Norman, it is a
steamer. It was unpleasant when nothing appeared, but when we left the
Bay, we saw the mountains till we got to the Cape. One mountain is called
the Lion’s Head, and another is called Green Point, and I myself saw those
mountains. That which is called the Lion’s Head, is like a lion asleep. And
another mountain above the town is that called Table Mountain; neverthe¬
less it is not like a table, still that name is proper for it.
   Before I came into the town, my heart said, “this place is not large,” but
when I entered it, I wondered, and was afraid. Oh, we slept that day. I have
forgotten to relate something I saw the day I arrived. I saw black people,
and I thought they were our kind, but they are not; they are Slams, called
in English, Malays. Also, I was astonished at their large hats, pointed at
the top, and large below. I saw some making baskets of reeds, and I wished
I knew how to do it. On the Saturday evening, we went to a shop to buy
butter and bread. At night lights were hung up throughout the whole
town. I had thought we were going to walk in the darkness. I have not yet
seen houses built with grass, like those we live in, they are high beautiful
houses. The roads where people walk, are very fine. I have not yet seen a
dirty, muddy place in the whole town. On the Sunday, bells sounded; there
is one big one, and other small ones; we went to service in the great church.
   Early on the Monday, wagons came about to sell things. Really people
here get these things for nothing from their owners. A person can get
men’s trousers for three shilling each, yet in other places a person can never
get them for that money. You can get three pairs of stockings for a shilling,
a child’s cap for a penny; you can get a width of a dress for threepence,
if it is five widths, it is a shilling and threepence. There are little wagons,
the man who drives the horses sits behind, the proprietor does nothing, he
sits so.
   Another thing. The shoes of the Malays astonished me. There is a heel,
and yonder on before a fjiece of wood sticks out, and they put it between
their toes, and so make a clattering like the Germans. As things are to be
got for such little money, how cheap must they be in England!


100   ♦    Nineteenth Century
   On Friday I saw a man riding in a wagon, there was a barrel inside and
a cross-bar, and the water came out there. I don’t know how it came out. It
watered the new road, which is being made. And on Tuesday I saw people
working at slates, taking off their ends—it was a great heap; the people
who were at work were four. On the day of our arrival, a house was burnt,
the people escaped, but I don’t know whether the goods escaped. There are
carts which go every day, carrying earth to throw on the road which is
being mended, drawn by one horse.
   There is a house where there are all kinds of beasts, and there are fig¬
ures of black people, as it they were alive; their blackness is very ugly; also
the bones of a man when he is dead, and birds and elephants, and lions,
and tigers and sea-shells. I was afraid of those people, and the skeleton.
There is also an ape holding Indian Corn, and there are monkeys.
   In the evening we went out again, we went to the houses of the Malays; we
went to see their decorations, for they were rejoicing because their days of fast¬
ing were ended. They were very beautiful; they had made flowers of paper, you
would never think they were made of paper. We went for the sole purpose of
seeing these works. They made a great noise, singing as they walked; you
would laugh to see the children dancing outside and clapping their hands.
   There are also wagons there for the sale of fish. The proprietors sound
a thing like a horn to announce that he who wishes to buy let him buy.
There are others for collecting dust-heaps, they ring a bell. There are vehi¬
cles to convey two people, he who drives the horses, and he who sits inside.
In some there are windows and lights lit at night: those windows are two.
   There are not many trees in the town; in some places there are not many
at all, but in one place it is like the bush; it is pleasant underneath the trees;
there are stools to sit on when a person is tired. That path is very long; I
saw two Newfoundland dogs. I did not know that I should ever come to
see them when I heard them spoken of. They are dogs with large heads and
great long ears; the hair is like sheep’s wool, and they have great claws; they
are suited to assist people. It seemed as if they could swallow me without
chewing; I was very much afraid, but one was not very big, it was about the
size of the dogs of black people, when it barks, it says so with a great voice.
Also, I saw sheep rather unlike others, in the tail here it was very large, the
head was small, and the body was large and fat.
   I have forgotten to mention something which I ought to have said
before; when I came out of the ship and walked on land the earth seemed
to move, and when I entered a house, it seemed to imitate the sailing of a
ship, and when I lay down it seemed to move.
   I saw an ox-wagon here, but I had not imagined that I should see a wagon.
  We go to a very large beautiful Church; I don’t forget the people who
sing, the English; the prayers are said with thin voices as if it were singing;
but the chief thing done is singing frequently, all the while there is con¬
tinually singing, and then sitting. There is a Kafir school here; I went one
day, they were reading; they can read well; there are also carpenters &c.


                                             Account of Capetown          ♦   101
  There is another place besides that which I said is like the bush, and in
that place there are trees and flowers, and two fountains; a thing is stuck
in, and the water comes out above. I saw the date-tree when it is young; it
is one leaf, yet when it is grown, it is a very large tree. In that place there
are wild birds, doves are there, and those birds which the English call
canaries, and a very beautiful bird, its tail is long, its bill is red.
  Yesterday the soldiers had sports, the music-band played, and when they
finished playing they fired. They were many, and they fired together. And
as we were walking, they fired; I was very much startled and afraid. And
to-day they are playing the music. It seems to-day it exceeds in sweetness,
I mean its sound.
   There came a person here who is a Kafir. I rejoiced very much when I
heard that he too was one. He asked me what I had come to do here; I said
“I am only travelling.” He asked whether I was a prisoner, and I said “No.”
He said he was very glad, he had thought I was a prisoner. I told him that
I was going away again, and he said “May you go in peace, the Lord pre¬
serve you well till you arrive whence you came.” I never saw a person like
him of such kindness; he said he had come here to learn, he came from
where I did; but I should not have known him to be a Kafir, and he did not
know that I was one.
   There are creatures which are eaten; they come from the sea, their name
is called crawfish, they are frightful in appearance, yet their flesh is very
fine and white.
   The person of this house is a dyer of clothes, the white he makes red,
and the red green, and the brown he makes black. I saw the wood with
which they dye. Soap is cut in pieces, and put in water, and heated and
boiled well, and continually stirred. This thing—dyeing clothes, is a great
work. Water is even in the house; I don’t know where it comes from, a per¬
son turns a thing, and fresh water comes out as if it were of a river.
   There are also carts for selling meat, and for selling bread. I saw the fire-
wagon, I did nothing but wonder. I did not know that it was such a big
thing. It is long, with many wheels, they are not so large as those of an ox-
wagon; people sit in places inside. The wheels run on metal; I say I could
do nothing but wonder very much. I had not thought that it was such a
great thing. And when it is about to proceed it says “Sh!” I don’t know
whether it is the boiling of the water; it hastens exceedingly, a person would
be unable to notice it well, yet now some people say that this is a small one
which I have seen. If it treads on anything, it must smash it, it is a very great
thing. I shall never forget it. Where I saw it, the place was fenced on both
sides, and I beheld it from the outside. I entered it another week after I had
seen it; we went to Somerset West and slept one night. In the morning we
returned by it: when I was inside, the earth seemed to move; it is pleasant
to ride inside. I end now although this is not all the news about it. When I
was in it, I saw a sugar plant; it is not a large plant, it is short with red flow¬
ers. I saw other trees at Somerset West which I had never seen before.


102   ♦   Nineteenth Century
  One day I saw people going to a burial, the carriages were black, but
that people should wear black clothes is done also among the natives where
a person has died; there were stuck up black feathers, and on the graves
were placed stones with writing; the name of the person was written, and
the years of his age, and the year in which he died.
  I have seen to-day another thing which I did not know of, that thing
which is said to be always done by white people in this month ol May.
They make themselves black people, they smear themselves with some¬
thing black, with red patches on the cheeks; a thing is made with ever¬
greens, and a man is put inside, and two people carry it, and another man
carries a pan, and goes begging lor money.
  Another thing which I saw during the past month, was people going to
the Governor’s house—little chiefs, and chiefs of the soldiers, some had
hats with red and white feathers, and silver coats, and gold swords, and the
bishop went too. I heard it said that they were going to hear the things
which were about to be spoken by people who had come from Graham’s
Town, King William’s Town, Beaufort, and other places; it was said that
these people were going to speak ol the state of those towns and the doings
of the people who live there. I do not say that those coats were really of
gold, I say there was gold on some parts of them, on the arms and the back.
   Also I have seen the fruit of the tree which the English call the chest¬
nut; I did not see what the tree is like, the fruit is nice, the outside of it is
hard; when you eat it it is sweet and edible like the potato, you can roast it
or boil it. There is another fruit called Banana in English, it also is a nice
fruit; it is not boiled or roasted, it is eaten like other fruits. There is a great
white sweet potato, it is called Sweet Potato; those potatoes are very large,
I had never seen them before, they are nearly all long: I do not know
whether they are the potatoes named “Medicine” by the Fingoes.
   I am puzzled to know how to begin to relate what was done yesterday,
but I will try. Yesterday was said to be the wedding-day of the Great Son
of Victoria, but it was not really the day of his marriage, for he has been
married some time. The thing first done was arranging the children of the
schools and I was there too. All walked in threes, going from one street to
another. When we left the school-house we took up our station on an open
piece of ground, other people climbed on the houses, and others looked on
from below. On one house where we were standing there was the figure of
a man like a king, a red cloth was put as if it were held by him, it is called
in English a flag. Amongst all of us there were flags of different beautiful
kinds; we stood there a great while, till we saw a multitude of soldiers and
their officers and little chiefs and different sorts of people: one set wore
clothes all alike, another had different clothes and ancient hats which were
worn by the people of that time. All these now went in front, a very long
line, then followed the ranks of another school, and we came after them.
When we had finished going through many streets, we went to stand in
another open spot of ground. All the time we were walking we were


                                              Account of Cape Town          *   103
singing the song of Victoria. And there we saw the Governor and his wife;
we all saluted. Although it seems that I have written a great deal I have not
yet wondered at the things done at night, but let me finish those of the
day. We were given food. We saw boats going along with people inside and
boys wearing red clothes; there followed one with an old man, his hairs
were long and white. There was a woman at his side wearing short clothes.
Other boats followed with people in them, all the time they were appear¬
ing the drum and trumpets were sounded. I don’t know how I shall make
myself understood. I never saw such a beautiful thing; some of the men
wore short dresses and short coats, and others wore short trousers like
those of the French. All these things were red. When we had finished
walking we went to stand in an open piece of ground, then we all went
home. I do not know if any other things were done.
  We went out again in the evening to see the fireworks. First we went
into the gardens, where there were what I shall call candles; but neverthe¬
less they are not called so in English. They were lights put inside little red
and green glasses—When I was at a distance I thought they were little
round things, all these were hung up and fastened in the trees,—there were
some large ones and there were others not put in glasses.
  We walked and went to a great crowd of people, we could not tell what
we should do to see that which we came to see. There we saw a tall man with
a high hat, I did not understand how it was made, and another man wearing
women’s clothes continually playing with that tall man. All these things have
their names in English, some were called Punch &Judy, Spectre, Father of
the Doomed Arm-chair, or the Maid, the Murderer and the Midnight
Avenger, and many other plays besides these. We passed on from that
woman and man and went to see white people smeared with soot, they went
into a house made of a tent where there were stools, and two came out and
spoke to the people saying, “Ladies and gentlemen, come in and see what we
have got here inside.” Some went in and others did not, afterwards they
opened that the people might see; there were black people sitting on chairs
and singing. So we left; at the entrance of the garden there was written in
letters of fire, “GOD bless Albert and Alexandra.” In another place there were
other things of fire, that place is called in English the Parade, where there
was a thing like a light-house, on all sides there were candles. Some people
sent up fire from Table Mountain, others from Green Point, others sent up
fire in the midst of the town, it went up and came down again.
   Besides these things there was another thing done, an ox was baked
whole, the legs were not removed, only the inside and the hoofs. Many tables
were set underneath the trees; that ox was intended for the poor people.
   I am going to end now; I am very glad that I was brought here to see
things which I never thought I should see.
  There is another thing which has lately taken place, the birthday of Queen
Victoria. Two balloons were made, no one went in them, there were only
lights. That sort is called fire-balloons. The first was sent up; it rose very high


104   ♦   Nineteenth Century
till it was like a star: I did not see it again where it went. The other reappeared,
it did not rise high like the first, it burnt, and fire came down like two stars.
   I saw where newspapers are printed; four people were at work. I do not
know what I shall say to tell about it. There is a thing which folds the papers
and another thing which continually receives them. It made us sleepy.
                                                                               E. M.

                                                                Translator unknown




   Anonymous, A MOTHER PRAISES HER BABY
                        Namibia 1867       KhoeKhoeGowab


This poem was first published in 1867 by the linguist Theophilus Hahn in his
report “Die Nama-Hottentotten.” The Nama are descended from the Khoekhoe,
an autochthonous people of southern Africa, and take their name from the Namib
desert in southern Namibia. Many Namas came originally from the southern and
southwestern Cape, which they left during the seventeenth and eighteenth cen¬
turies to avoid slavery. Others who joined them had lived in southern Namibia for
a long time. The two groups shared a cultural and linguistic heritage that enabled
their merging into a larger polity known as Nama.
   The 1860s were a decade of political upheaval throughout southern and central
Namibia. Pressured by British colonialism from the south, the intrusion of
German missionaries and traders, and the slow westward movement of the Herero,
the Nama polity was also experiencing internal strife. It was changing from being
a hunting, gathering, and herding society into a highly militarized one that
depended on trading cattle, ivory, and ostrich feathers for guns. Those Nama who
traded and had extended contact with European settlers not only came to have
knowledge of guns and horses, but also had some mission education, with the
result that the leading men were literate. The cultural context of this poem, then,
is that of a modernizing elite and a society in transition.
    A simmering war between certain Nama clans, particularly those under the so-
called lion of the desert, Captain Hendrik Witbooi, and the Herero, led by the
great chief Samuel Maharero I, was also a feature of the 1860s. It was a war rich
in invective but not very bloody, usually conducted for cattle raiding and less often
for land. A man’s customary right to a portion of game—and by extension cattle
is taken for granted in the poem.
    This praise poem offers insight into women’s responsibility for sustaining Nama cul¬
ture in the face of challenges both internal and external. While the speaker emphasizes
 male sexuality and reproduction, the male child inherits his clear-sightedness from his
mother. Within the extended family and clan, older women were well respected as
keepers of knowledge and decision makers. Research suggests that Nama women in
the 1890s could hold ownership rights to cattle and usufruct rights to the milk (graz¬
ing grounds were not yet privatized). The respect of the son for his mother is foretold
here in his bringing her a portion of the cattle he will capture from the Herero.
                                                                        Yvette Abrahams



                                           A Mother Praises Her Baby            ♦   105
   You son of a clear-eyed mother,
   You far-sighted one,
      How you will track game one day,
   You, who have strong arms and legs,
   You strong-limbed one,
      How surely you will shoot, plunder the Herrero,
   And bring your mother their fat cattle to eat,
   You child of a strong-thighed father,
   How you will subdue strong oxen between your thighs one day,
   You who have a mighty penis,
      How many and what mighty children you will beget!


                                                   Transcribed by Theophilus Hahn
                 Translated by Willard Trask and adapted by Werner Hillebrecht




           Lydia Umkasetemba, UNANANA-BOSELE
                           South Africa 1868       isiZulu


Lydia Umkasetemba (that is, wife of Setemba) performed the story of Nanana for
the missionary Henry Callaway in the mid-1850s. Nothing is known about her
except that Callaway recorded her name beside ten of the folktales that he pub¬
lished in 1868 under the title Nursery Tales, Traditions and Histories of the Zulus, in
Their Own Words with a Translation into English and Notes. Most of his other
informants were men. Callaway arrived in Natal from London in 1854 and
founded the Springvale Mission near the present town of Richmond in KwaZulu-
Natal. He later became the incumbent of St. Andrew’s Church in Pietermaritz
Street, Pietermaritzburg. Setemba, Lydia’s husband, was one of his first converts.
   In his preface, Callaway explains that when he begah learning Zulu in 1856
there was no publication that a student of the language could use, and therefore he
taught himself by beginning “to write at the dictation of Zulu natives, as one means
of gaining an accurate knowledge of words and idioms.” Recognizing that the mate¬
rial he had gathered would be of great use to “the missionary, the philologist, the
ethnologist, and antiquarian, as well as to a large portion of the general public,” he
allowed friends and colleagues to persuade him that it should be published. He also
decided that the stories should appear in an English translation, as well as in the
original Zulu, so that they could be used to teach “the English Zulu, or the Zulus
English.” Callaway’s nineteenth-century orthography adds the vocative “U” to
Lydia’s married name of Nanana.
   Stories in isiZulu are often derived from proverbs. The originating proverb for
“Unanana-bosele” is llunenkh.ni okweselesele lifunukuyemsamo ’ (“a person who is as
obstinate as a frog which, when pushed away, keeps returning and hiding in remote
areas of the house”). The description of Nanana-Bosele (her name likens her to a
frog) as having “willfully built her house in the road trusting to self confidence and

106    ♦   Nineteenth Century
superior power” indicates that her stubbornness will prevail in the story. In other
Zulu versions of the tale, the monster elephant, rather than the woman, becomes
the most important figure. The Zulu versions are concluded so as to reflect a prac¬
tice known as ukuxoshisa, which meant that a heroic deed had to be rewarded. A
king would give a particular hero a number of cattle, or even women, as a way of
acknowledging a valorous deed. In the various versions, some in other languages of
the region, Nanana-Bosele either receives gifts for her heroism in saving the peo¬
ple who had been devoured by the elephant or finds that the people she has saved
are willing to serve under her as a way of thanking her. Either way, the storyteller
recognizes Nanana-Bosele’s bravery.
   Because a frog can live both in water and on land, it is a figure of survival in
extreme conditions. At a symbolic level this suggests that captivity in the ele¬
phant’s stomach is a form of death that signals the beginning of a new life cycle.
The people imprisoned in the stomach begin to live anew after being redeemed.
There is also a moral theme to the story. The elephant is a huge animal compared
to Nanana-Bosele—a mere woman-frog—which implies that a small, weak, and
seemingly powerless creature should not be underestimated. What is important is
intelligence rather than size. Nanana-Bosele proves that determination and per¬
sistence can overcome even the most terrifying situations.
                                                                        N. B. Zondi


                                         ♦

There was a woman who had two young children; they were very fine; and
there was another child who used to stay with them. But that woman, it is
said, had wilfully built her house in the road, trusting to self-confidence
and superior power.
   On a certain occasion she went to fetch firewood, and left her children
alone. A baboon came and said, “Whose are those remarkably beautiful chil¬
dren?” The child replied, “Unanana-bosele’s.” The baboon said, “She built in
the road on purpose, trusting to self-confidence and superior power.”
   Again an antelope came and asked the same question. The child
answered, “They are the children of Unanana-bosele.             All animals came
 and asked the same question, until the child cried for tear.
   A very large elephant came and said, “Whose are those remarkably
beautiful children?     The child replied,     Unanana-bosele s.     The elephant
 asked the second time, “Whose are those remarkably beautiful children?”
The child replied, “Unanana-bosele’s.” The elephant said, “She built in the
 road on purpose, trusting to self-confidence and superior power.” He swal¬
 lowed them both, and left the little child. The elephant then went away.
    In the afternoon the mother came and said, “Where are the children?
 The little girl said, “They have been taken away by an elephant with one
 tusk.” Unanana-bosele said, “Where did he put them?” The little girl
 replied, “He ate them.” Unanana-bosele said, “Are they dead?” The little
 girl replied, “No. I do not know.”
    They retired to rest. In the morning she ground much maize, and put it
 into a large pot with amasi, and set out, carrying a knife in her hand. She

                                                       Unanana-bosele        ♦   107
came to the place where there was an antelope; she said, “Mother, mother,
point out for me the elephant which has eaten my children; she has one
tusk.” The antelope said, “You will go till you come to a place where the
trees are very high, and where the stones are white.” She went on.
  She came to the place where was the leopard; she said, “Mother, mother,
point out for me the elephant which has eaten my children.” The leopard
replied, “You will go on and on, and come to the place where the trees are
high, and where the stones are white.”
      She went on, passing all animals, all saying the same. When she was still
at a great distance she saw some very high trees and white stones below
them. She saw the elephant lying under the trees. She went on; when she
came to the elephant she stood still and said, “Mother, mother point out
for me the elephant which has eaten my children.” The elephant replied,
“You will go on and on, and come to where the trees are high, and where
the stones are white.” The woman merely stood still, and asked again, say¬
ing, “Mother, mother, point out for me the elephant which has eaten my
children.” The elephant again told her just to pass onward. But the woman,
seeing that it was the very elephant she was seeking, and that she was
deceiving her by telling her to go forward, said a third time, “Mother,
mother, point out for me the elephant which has eaten my children.”
   The elephant seized her and swallowed her too. When she reached the
elephant’s stomach, she saw large forests, and great rivers, and many high
lands; on one side there were many rocks; and there were many people who
had built their villages there; and many dogs and many cattle; all was there
inside the elephant; she saw too her own children sitting there. She gave
them amasi, and asked them what they ate before she came. They said,
“We have eaten nothing. We merely lay down.” She said, “Why did you not
roast this flesh?” They said, “If we eat this beast, will it not kill us?” She
said, “No; it will itself die; you will not die.” She kindled a great fire. She
cut the liver, and roasted it and ate with her children. They cut also the
flesh, and roasted and ate.
  All the people which were there wondered, saying, “O, forsooth, are they
eating, whilst we have remained without eating any thing?” The woman
said, “Yes, yes. The elephant can be eaten.” All the people cut and ate.
  And the elephant told the other beasts, saying, “From the time I swallowed
the woman I have been ill; there has been pain in my stomach.” The other
animals said, “It may be, O chief, it arises because there are now so many peo¬
ple in your stomach.” And it came to pass after a long time that the elephant
died. The woman divided the elephant with a knife, cutting through a rib
with an axe. A cow came out and said, “Moo, moo, we at length see the coun¬
try.” A goat came out and said, “Mey, mey, at length we see the country.” A
dog came out and said, “At length we see the country.” And the people came
out laughing and saying,* “At length we see the country.” They made the
woman presents; some gave her cattle, some goats, and some sheep. She set
out with her children, being very rich. She went home rejoicing because she


108    ♦   Nineteenth Century
had come back with her children. On her arrival her little girl was there; she
rejoiced, because she was thinking that her mother was dead.


                                  Transcribed and translated by Henry Callaway




                       Tryn Isaac, AFFIDAVIT
                           South Africa 1873       Dutch


Tryn Isaac was a well-situated woman in Griqua society. As Adam Kok’s niece and
a Christian, she belonged to the Griqua elite. She lived on a w7/(homestead) with
her extended family. Everyone on the werf recognized Kok’s authority; the men
formed part of his commando unit assisting on raids and protecting his territory,
while the women performed a nurturing and supportive role in this often-violent
era. Isaac’s affidavit appears to reflect profound family values, since she identifies
each of her siblings by name and takes special pride in her brother David’s ability
to fire accurately, despite his wound.
   We presume that Isaac narrated her story in Dutch, and that it was taken down
and translated into English by court officials. She tells the story of David’s death
and indicates where her brother’s grave is located. David’s grave, known in
Afrikaans as Dawid’sgraf was covered by a few flat stones and a headstone, and was
used as a beacon to indicate the division between Kok’s and Nicholas Waterboer’s
territories. The location of this grave was also central to the land disputes between
the various Griqua Kapteins and the Orange Free State. It was, in addition, widely
rumored that the gravestones had been moved a few miles by a Dutch farmer who
sought to enhance his land holdings. Disputes over land intensified with the dis¬
covery of diamonds in 1868. A commission in 1870 sought to locate Dawids praf
and hence to determine who had authority over this diamond-bearing ground.
Although the Griqua territories were annexed by the Cape Colony and renamed
Griqualand West in 1871, disputes over land ownership continued and Tryn Isaac’s
affidavit is part of a series of attempts to resolve this matter, as well as the more
general issue of authority over the land. Her affidavit was included in a book pro¬
duced in 1875 by David Arnot (Griqua agent) and Francis H. S. Orpen (the British
government’s surveyor-general) titled The Land Question of Gric/ualand West, which
was intended to help settle claims arising from promises and cessions made before
the Griqua territories became British.
   Isaac’s story may have had a happy ending. James Perkins (the magistrate who
 heard her affidavit) recommended her in 1873 for a “small pension adequate to
 [her] daily wants.”
                                                                      Linda Waldman


                                          ♦

 I am a Christian woman. I was born not far from Cape Town, near
 Piquetberg, at the farm of one Willem Burgers, where my father, old David
 Isaac, lived. My mother and the mother of the present chief, Adam Kok,


                                                                 Affidavit     ♦   109
were sisters’ children. Our father and all the family emigrated with the first
Griqua emigration. He died at Griqua Town. When Adam Kok removed
from those parts to Philippolis our family intended following him. We first
removed to “Kains,” near where Field-cornet du Plooi lives, on the north
side of the Riet River, some distance below its junction with the Modder
River.
      H ostilities broke out between Adam       Kok and some Bitterbush
Korannas in his district. The men of our “werf” were my husband David,
Piet Isaac, Jan Isaac, David Isaac, and Hans Isaac, my four brothers; Cobus
Isaac and Paul Isaac, my nephews. My sister Anna, Letta, Lys, and I were
also there, as well as the wives of Jan and David Isaac. My brothers, Jan
and David Isaac, went to join Adam Kok’s commando. After a time one Jan
Kok returned from the commando, and brought us news that my brother
David Isaac was wounded. The way it happened I heard was this: Adam
Kok had beaten the Korannas at Schietmakaar, and David was returning
homewards with others when Jan Kok fired a shot at a vulture near to
Opperman’s farm. Some Korannas in the neighbourhood hearing it, lay in
wait for them at a ridge. Setebe, a noted headman among the Korannas,
led the party, and was seen and recognized before a shot was fired. He
fired, and hit my brother David Isaac below the left knee; my brother stag¬
gered, and Setebe cried out, “that hit you,” but my brother took aim, fired,
and shot him dead; upon which the Korannas carried him off, and our peo¬
ple also carried away my brother David Isaac for some distance, in a
“brayed” hide, till he became too weak to carry further, and Jan came on to
tell us. On the news arriving, the wagon was prepared, and we started that
evening, travelling the whole night. We crossed the Riet River at the drift
at the junction, and went up along the road on the south side. It was dawn
when we crossed, and about eight o’clock when we reached the place where
David Isaac lay, adjacent to the river, and to the left of the road. There were
with him Adam Vink, Hendrik Boer, and Jan Isaac. Those who accompa¬
nied me in the wagon were Jan Kok, Piet Isaac, Cobus Isaac, Paul Isaac,
and my husband David; the women were Anna Isaac, David’s wife Fytje,
and I. We made a bed for him under the wagon, and put mats round it for
shelter. He had been wounded in the left knee as he was kneeling on the
other knee to shoot, and the leg bones were split open downwards. About
eight o’clock the next morning he died, and he was buried in the afternoon
in a grave dug with a spade we had brought. We returned home the next
day. The next winter we removed to the little ridge opposite the grave, and
close to Jacobsdal, between Jacobsdal and the river. We remained there
about a year, and while we were there the small-pox attacked us. It was the
same year that Adam Kok had the disease. My eldest sister, Anna, died
there, and a Hottentot named Hans, one named Linx, and a Hottentot ser¬
vant of Piet Isaac. My sister was buried opposite to my brother David’s
grave, on the other side of the Riet River. During the time we stayed there
I often came across to my brother David’s grave. We afterwards left, and


110    ♦   Nineteenth Century
went with the wagons from that spot down to between the two rivers, near
the junction, where we crossed at a drift, and from there we moved to
Philippolis. There is now a house there on the north side of the drift, a lit¬
tle above the present Police Camp. Many years afterwards, when Adam
Kok went with a commission to Nomansland, before the emigration to
that country, I came to visit my brother David’s grave with my late brother
Jan Isaac and my late husband; we were on our way to visit friends in
Namaqualand; the grave was still there, only sunken flat; the stones were
there still; they were of round and irregular form; the head-stone was
rather long, whilst that at the foot was shorter. I was taken on Saturday
last, the fifth of April, to the Police Camp, and from there on Monday the
seventh. I showed the Magistrate, Mr. Perkins, and the other gentleman
with him the road along which I had travelled to see my brother David die,
to the vicinity of his grave, passing by the above-mentioned drift, near and
above the Police Camp. I recognized the country, and the particular local¬
ity, and got out of the wagon to look for the grave. I could not hnd it, but
mentioned its approximate position as being a little above, say two hun¬
dred yards, that which I was afterwards shown by Mr. Maclean as having
been pointed out to him by Manel Isaac.
                                                                      Her
                                                              TRYN x ISAAC,
                                                                     mark.


                                            Transcriber and translator unknown




              IKuoeiten ta //ken,
    What the Maidens Do with Rooi Klip
                           South Africa 1874     /Xam


 Little is known of IKweiten ta //ken beyond the few stories and fragments of rit¬
 ual information she gave to Lucy Lloyd during the nineteenth century in Cape
 Town. Lloyd, the sister-in-law of linguist Wilhelm Bleek, transcribed and trans¬
 lated her oral accounts, which were eventually archived in the Bleek and Lloyd
 Collection at the University of Cape Town Libraries. While Bleek worked prima¬
 rily on /Xam linguistics, Lloyd recorded the kukummi, which, according to J. D.
 Lewis-Williams, can be approximately translated as “stories, news, talk, informa¬
 tion, history and what English speakers call myths and folklore.” Lloyd was
 awarded an honorary D.Litt. by the University of the Cape of Good Hope (now
 the University of Cape Town) a year before she died in 1914 at age seventy-nine.
 Dorothea Bleek, the daughter of Wilhelm Bleek, continued the work of her aunt
 and her father and saw to the publication of the some of the /Xam kukummi. ,
    The elements of IKweiten ta //ken’s name, according to Dorothea Bleeks A
 Bushman Dictionary, mean “rainstones and sorcery” in the now-extinct /Xam lan¬
 guage. IKweiten ta //ken came to Cape Town from the Katkop Mountains of

                             What the Maidens Do with Rooi Klip             ♦   111
South Africa, north of Calvinia, on 13 June 1874. With her was her husband
=Kasin (“Klaas Katkop”) and two youngest boys, aged six and two. She joined her
brother Dia!kwain at Mowbray, the home of the Bleek family. Dialkwain had been
a prisoner at Cape Town’s Breakwater Prison, but was released to act as an inform¬
ant to the Bleeks. His sister may have come to Cape Town to join him, staying a
few months at Mowbray and caring for her children there. Perhaps because of the
children, perhaps because of her temperament, and perhaps because Wilhelm
Bleek died around that time and may have not been well enough to work, there
were months during which !Kweiten ta //ken did no interviews at all. Hence, her
contributions to the oral material were few compared with those of other /Xam-
speaking people. From her accounts, however, it can be deduced that she had
detailed knowledge of hunting and gathering in the Katkop environment and that
she lived in a community with a flourishing oral tradition. She was later joined by
her two eldest boys, and left Cape Town on 13 January 1875.
   In the text reprinted here, the parentheses and endnotes reflect Lucy Lloyd’s
handwritten original (though she uses asterisks, not superscript numbers). The
“R.” referred to in the endnotes is an unidentified informant. Throughout the text
the abbreviation “acct.” stands for the word “account.”
                                                                        Megan Biesele


                                          ♦


The maiden, she ornaments the spring with \rooi klip]1 when she becomes a
maiden; she wishes that the spring may not dry up (lit. go out); because she
wishes that the water might remain quietly in the spring. Because she wishes
that the water may not dry up; that the water may remain in the spring.
Therefore they adorn the spring, when they become maidens. Therefore,
they adorn the spring on acct. of it; because they wish that the spring may
not dry up, that it (the water) might remain quietly on acct. of it. Therefore,
the old women tell them about it; therefore, they (the maidens) adorn the
water’s springs, on acct. of it. They wish that the spring may not become dry.
   Thence it is, that the girls adorn the young men,2 because they wish that
the rain may not lightning kill them (the youngymen). Therefore, they
adorn them, on acct. of it.
   The Water’s Story.
   Therefore, they (the maidens) adorn the young men, on acct. of it; for
the rain comes out (in) the young men.3 Therefore, they (the maidens)
adorn them on acct. of it, with \rooi klip], that the rain may not come out
(upon them). Therefore, they adorn them, on acct. of it.

    1. The Bushgirls put it round the springs, & adorn the springs with it, so that the
water shall not dry up—R. tells me. The women paint their cheeks with it, & also their
karosses, R. says. The maidens put it on the men’s backs.
   2. (with stripes, made by the root klip, like a zebra).
   3. as sores, R. says.


                                         Transcribed and translated by Lucy Lloyd


112 ♦ Nineteenth Century
                  Noneko (Hannah) Toney,
               Letter to Miss Mackenzie
                           South Africa 1875      English


Noneko Toney came to Zonnebloem College in the Cape about a year after Emma
Sandile and her age-mate Hester Ngece (see text by Emma Sandile). She was
eleven or twelve years old. According to Matilda Smart, her schoolmistress, Toney
was “rescued from almost a state of slavery, and to this day the effect has not passed
away.” Her abilities, however, were “excellent,” Smart noted, “especially in the
scriptural knowledge and her reading.” Three years later Toney was baptized
Harriet Mary but called Hannah Toney.
  After the girls’ department at Zonnebloem closed in 1869, Toney spent the next
four years teaching in the infants’ school at St. George’s Orphanage, Cape Town.
In 1872, she finally returned to her homeland to head the Girls’ School at St.
Mark’s Mission, on the Kei River in the Transkeian territory of Independent
Kaffraria. Rev. H. T. Waters, who founded the mission in 1855, was still in charge.
   St. Mark’s was situated in the midst of a dense African population and by the
1870s was encircled three miles deep by largely Christian villages. A school
inspector’s report in 1873 notes that the Girls’ School was divided into five classes,
three “Kafir” and two “Hottentot.” In the same “Report on Schools in the Eastern
Districts and Transkeian Territory” by Deputy Inspector O. H. Hogarth, Toney
was commended for the good discipline and organization in her school. The stan¬
dard was reportedly high, and the work “for the most part, well done.”
   The letter reproduced below was written to Miss Anne Mackenzie, editor ol
The Net (the journal of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel) and the sis¬
ter of Bishop Charles Mackenzie, who led the ill-fated pioneering expedition of
the Universities’ Mission to Central Africa. While waiting to join the Zambesi
Mission early in 1862, Anne Mackenzie spent a year at Zonnebloem teaching at
local mission schools and befriending the Xhosa girls. Following the bishop’s
death, she returned to England and used The Net to maintain much needed sup¬
port for Zonnebloem through publishing regular reports of the college’s work and
students’ essays and letters.
                                                                        Janet Hodgson


                                          ♦

My dear Madam,—I now take my pen to write a few lines, as I have been
thinking of doing so a long time. I often think of you, and I daresay you
would like to hear about the school out here. I have sixty girls that attend
nice and regularly. I used to have three girls to assist me, but one ot them
has left for Queenstown, where her father has undertaken the native
school. My first class are now able to read in the third reading books, and
in compound long division sums. They already know a little geography ot
this world, and they are more fond of it than I used to be.            I teach them
the map of Palestine, to make them understand what they are learning. I
tell them it all in Kafir [Xhosa], and it makes it quite interesting to them.
The Kafir has all come back to me quite natural. The second class read

                                              Letter to Miss Mackenzie         ♦   113
Peep of Day, and are in addition and subtraction sums. We have a nice
large school-room. There is a boarding school for boys. Mr. Waters is
thinking of opening one for the girls soon. I daresay you read the account
of the Ordination of three native deacons. I will never forget that day; it
was as fine as we could wish it to be. There was an early and late celebra¬
tion of the Communion; the Service commenced at 8 a.m.; it was very
hearty, and the chants were beautiful. It was in three languages, English,
Kafir, and Dutch. It was so solemn when they were presented to the
Bishop by the Archdeacon. Before that, the Archdeacon preached a nice
sermon through an interpreter, one of the deacons. I think it will be a day
long to be remembered in Kafir land. After they were ordained, each of
them read the Gospel, one in Kafir, English, and Dutch.
   We have morning and evening prayers, like at St. George’s Cathedral
[Cape Town]; only here it is chanted the same as Sunday. One of the dea¬
cons, the Rev. Jonas Ntsiko, has a station of his own; it is a very large
Mission, I believe; the other, Rev. Peter Mesiza, goes about visiting the
out-stations; the last, Rev. L. Adonis, is a schoolmaster here; he assists Mr.
Waters in the Church; there is also a nice harmonium in it. That is only
needed in the English Service, as we do not require it in the native, for we
manage better without it. Mr. Waters is so very very kind to everyone;
everyone loves him, both Red and Christian Kafirs. I have a very nice lit¬
tle room, fitted up so very comfortable. I live very close to the Kie river;
we get our water, also bathe there. It is very large in the rainy seasons; the
boys catch eels there, the river fish. Oh it is so very dry out here; we have
prayers offered up for rain. I hope we will get some soon, for the cattle and
sheep, all that sort of thing, are dying for want of grass. The last prayer
meeting we had, the Church was crowded with natives, and the head men
on the station were allowed to give a short address in turns. Some of them
were very nicely given. We are just at the end of one week’s holiday. All the
teachers from the out-stations have come for their Quarterly Meeting, to
talk about their different work. Two of them are my Zonnebloem old
friends. I wonder if I could give you a description of St. Mark’s. I think this
place is about the driest in Kafirland. We have the mountains all round,
and it is built like an English village; it looks so pretty at a distance. There
are three shops, a carpenter and shoemaker, blacksmith, tinsmith, and trav¬
eller accommodation; so I think we are very well off. I must end. Good
night.—Yours respectfully, Hannah Mary Toney.




                           *




114   ♦   Nineteenth Century
                                Anonymous,
The Story of Ngangezwe and Mnyamana
                           South Africa 1879       isiZulu


Although black women were conventionally responsible for passing on and some¬
times transforming through their own personal style the traditional narratives that
provided much of the educational material in oral communities, white male mis¬
sionaries generally collected oral material from men. Since early collections and
transcriptions involving white and black women are rare, this text—a transcription
by Mrs. Hugh Lancaster Carbutt of an unnamed Zulu storyteller—is especially
important. Among white women the only other known examples of transcription
around this time are by Lucy Lloyd and, later, Dorothea Bleek, working in the
Cape (see the text titled “What the Maidens Do with Rooi Klip").
   Although we cannot assume we have access to the unmediated words of this
Zulu storyteller, indications are that Carbutt took care to record them as they were
spoken, although her understanding of the language was imperfect. Fortunately
she provided the Folk-Lore Journal with the Zulu text alongside her own transla¬
tion and so the text could be retranslated by the well-known contemporary Zulu
novelist Lauretta Ngcobo.
   Carbutt notes that the story comes from “the daughter of an old soldier of
Mpande.” Mpande initially led the battle against encroaching Voortrekkers in
Natal, but in 1839 became their ally, splitting the Zulu nation by waging war
against his half-brother Dingane instead. Mpande ruled his new Zulu kingdom
until the mid-1850s, remaining hospitable toward white settlers. He died in 1872.
The oral exchange between these two women, then, was made possible in that con¬
text of relative amity.
   The tale describes a struggle for lineage: The chief’s nkosikazi (great wife) plots
against the boy-child who stands in the way of her own son’s inheritance of the
chieftaincy, but the boy survives, reclaims his rightful place, and forgives his rival.
The story’s major interest rests on the fragility of genealogical inheritance rights,
reflecting ongoing struggles within polygynous families. Each mother has to fight
for her own son’s share in the family inheritance. Embodied in the story also is a
deep philosophical belief, pervasive among Zulus and many other African value
systems, concerning the sources of good and evil. The extended family can never
be so evil that it is destructive of itself. True evil comes from outside the family.
(This is why every Zulu homestead is fenced in, and why a breastfeeding mother
will wash her breast on returning home and before feeding her baby.) Family feuds
cannot be seen to destroy the family unit; no matter how serious, they cannot con¬
stitute absolute evil. Therefore, family problems must be resolved. Only those who
seek to destroy the family may be cast out.
                                                 Dorothy Driver and Lauretta Ngcobo


                                           ♦

A long time ago in KwaZulu, there was a King who was rich and famous
with a large kingdom. He had many wives, and two of his wives gave him
two sons. The older son was called Mnyamana (the Dark One) and the
younger was called Ngangezwe (As-Great-as-the-World). The King did

                          The Story of Ngangezwe and Mnyamana                  ♦   115
not love Mnyamana as much as he loved Ngangezwe. This inspired fear
and jealousy in the heart of Mnyamana’s mother. She was the senior wife
and this should have made her son the heir to the King. But she feared that
her husband would influence the people to appoint his favourite son,
Ngangezwe, as heir to the throne after his death. And on a personal note,
this meant that she would lose her own position of honour and authority
as the senior wife. Instead, Ngangezwe ’s mother would ascend to power as
the mother of the King. She herself would be a nobody.
   One day, when Mnyamana and Ngangezwe were going out to herd cat¬
tle with their respective retinues, Mnyamana’s mother called him aside.
  “Come here, son,” she said as she went into her hut. “My child, you know
how much your father dotes on your brother, Ngangezwe. He certainly loves
you less. The day he dies your father will make him king even though peo¬
ple know it should be you, his elder son. It seems obvious that Ngangezwe
will become king after your father’s death. I tell you now, kill him.
  “Now take this little stone,” she continued. “This is no ordinary stone. I
have medicated it. It is covered with a powerful potion. All you need do is
follow my instructions.
   “When you get to the veld charge your followers with the duty of look¬
ing after the cattle. Send them a distance away from you and your brother.
  “Then, when you’re alone, say to Ngangezwe: ‘Let us play a game with
small stones, like this.’ You gather some stones and while he is not look¬
ing, put this little stone among them. Show him how to play the game.
Take one stone and place it inside your mouth. Tell him to do the same.
You pick this special stone and give it to him. Then you will see.”
  Mnyamana took the stone and hid it on his person, making certain no
one else knew anything about it.
  When they reached the cattle, they saw that they were well scattered. Then
Mnyamana said to his people, “Go and fetch the cattle. I want to see them.”
  Once the others were gone, the brothers sat down in the shade.
Mnyamana proceeded to gather small stones, occasionally tossing them as
if he were playing.
  He then called to his brother, Ngangezwe, playfully, “Shall we play
while the others are gone?”
   “Yes, my brother, shall we? But what shall we play?” asked Ngangezwe,
looking around.
  “I know a game, a game of stones. You put one in the mouth, like this,”
said Mnyamana as he put a stone in his mouth. So saying, he picked out
the stone his mother had given him and gave it to Ngangezwe.
  “And then . . .” continued Mnyamana. But Ngangezwe had popped it
in his mouth. He was rolling it in his mouth when suddenly the stone
slipped and stuck fast in^ his windpipe. He coughed and he choked. The
stone would not come out. He tried all he could to cough the stone out
but it was stuck in his throat. He heaved and spluttered, but nothing hap¬
pened.


116   ♦ Nineteenth Century
  At this point, the first of their followers began to arrive. Ngangezwe was
lying on the ground, in a state of distress. They asked anxiously what the
matter was and Mnyamana began to explain that a tiny pebble had lodged
in Ngangezwe’s throat. Confusion ensued. Many of Ngangezwe’s followers
were hysterical when they saw his eyes popping as though he were dying.
But there was no mistaking it, Mnyamana’s people were secretly rejoicing
for they too knew Ngangezwe was the King’s favourite. As things were,
they could already surmise that Ngangezwe would die and their own leader
would take power.
  Mnyamana walked home with a spring in every step he took. It was evi¬
dent for everyone to see that he and his followers were happy. At some
point, Ngangezwe stood up and began to walk home. His retinue followed
him dejectedly. They walked slowly with great sadness in their hearts.
When they approached the Great Place they went and stood at the gate of
the cattle kraal. A person standing next to the King drew his attention to
the grave scene at the gate. They observed that Ngangezwe stood solemn
and silent while his followers were weeping. The King came out and asked
Mnyamana directly, “What’s the matter?”
 Mnyamana began to explain to his father, “Ngangezwe and I were play¬
ing with stones. He put one in his mouth and it slipped into his windpipe.
It got stuck there. Now he cannot speak.”
   The King began to mourn. He could see that Ngangezwe would not
recover for he could not even take food. One custom in his kingdom was
that once the prospects of recovery had been ruled out, the dying, whoever
they were, had to be assisted to die. They would be thrown into a deep hole
with a little food and left to die alone, in private. The King knew that his
son faced this fate. The hole was deep and dark.
  As soon as his condition was ascertained, preparations were made to
have Ngangezwe thrown into the deep hole. His followers took his dogs,
assegais, mats, pillows, sticks and all his property, and proceeded to the
hole. Ngangezwe followed dutifully. Mnyamana and his people went too.
   But the King did not go along.
   When they came to the hole, they all sat down. Ngangezwe’s people
handed him snuff and he took it. They too joined him and took snuff as
they all wept bitterly. When they had finished taking snuff they began
throwing his things, one by one, into the hole. Lastly they threw him in as
well. They did it with ceremony, as gently as they could. They then
returned home. By this time, of course, Mnyamana was full of great joy.
   Ngangezwe was left with his dogs in the hole. As soon as they landed at
the bottom, the dogs began to work diligently, d hey took a pot and began
scouting around the hole. Soon they found a fountain of water, good and
clear, on one side of the hole. They dipped into it and brought the fresh
water to Ngangezwe. They poured it down his throat. This immediately
washed off the offending, sticky potion from the stone in his throat. It
became unstuck immediately and Ngangezwe was well again.


                       The Story of Ngangezwe and Mnyamana            ♦   117
  The dogs then set to work again, digging a passage away from the hole.
They worked frantically to get out of the hole, until they reached the sur¬
face. Once they had succeeded, they went back and began to carry all his
things out. One by one they brought them to the surface. And last of all
they brought Ngangezwe out as well. He saw the sun again.
  He was safe at last. Where to go from here, he wondered. His heart
pounding with the joy of life reclaimed, he stood still, wondering which
way to go. One part of his heart said, “Go back home!” and the other part
said, “Don’t!” In the end he chose to go away and turn his back on all those
he loved. He left with his dogs that very day.
   He walked for many days. Occasionally, his dogs caught wild animals
for him when he was hungry. After about a month of wandering he
reached a country ruled by another king. He pleaded with that King to
accept him as one of his subjects. And so it was that he became one of the
King’s servants and he lived in that country for a long time.
  The King was impressed with Ngangezwe. He proved to be a clever young
man, and his dogs were clever too. He worked hard and could be trusted. The
King grew to like Ngangezwe and slowly he gave him cattle and advanced him
until he was made a headman in the area. Before long Ngangezwe got married
to one of the King’s daughters. His cattle increased and he became a rich man.
He was able to afford more wives. He soon became a noble man with a large
homestead of his own, full of many children. He became well known in military
circles as well, and he got a regiment of his own to lead. He was a happy man.
    One day, after a long time, he began to think of his father’s home. “I
want to go to see my father. I want to go and see my country.” He went to
the King and asked to go home to see his father, but the King would not
let him. He feared losing his own daughter, Ngangezwe’s wife. Ngangezwe
pleaded with the King until he consented.
  As soon as the King had agreed, Ngangezwe gathered all his cattle,
called up all his soldiers, took his wives and children and bade farewell to
the King, and left. Ngangezwe and his people were on the road for a
month. Then one day he saw the hills of home and on one of them he set
up his new homestead. But he warned his people never to tell anyone who
he really was. And they made their way home.
   One day, Ngangezwe heard that there was to be a beer-drinking party
at his old father’s homestead. He took a few of his men and went to the
party to drink beer and meet young girls. When they got there they found
Mnyamana, his brother, sitting in the cattle kraal where the men often
met. He could see some of his old friends who used to serve him when he
was a young man. Mnyamana was talking and laughing with his own men,
but those who had formerly belonged to Ngangezwe were sitting silently
as though they were outsiders. This heartened Ngangezwe because he con¬
cluded that his men were still loyal to his memory.
  Then he spotted his mother and sister sitting down at the outside gate
of the homestead. They looked drab and neglected. After all the years they


118   ♦   Nineteenth Century
were still wearing their mourning clothes. As they sat at the gate, the
passersby would throw ashes on them, a sign of deep mourning. His
mother’s hut, too, had been moved from its eminent position belonging to
the senior Queen of the King’s palace. Her hut was relegated to a spot
amongst a cluster of obscure, nameless huts near the gate. He could see the
visible humiliation that his mother had suffered at the hands of Mnyamana
and his mother.
  As the party progressed, girls came and mingled treely with the young
men. Everyone joined in, except for Ngangezwe. He ignored the girls,
instead he slipped silently away and walked towards the gate. At first his
mother and sister did not recognise him. He began talking to them. As he
bent over to talk to them he could hear derisive comments from some of
the girls. They remarked that such a noble-looking man should stoop to
talk to such a debased pair as that mother and daughter. They remarked
that his sister was unwashed. But Ngangezwe did not care when they
laughed. He just went on talking to his sister until it was nearly sunset. As
he was leaving, he persuaded her to be his friend. She agreed. She still did
not recognise the fine, noble man as her own brother. Ele invited both his
mother and sister to come and see him at his home. Then he went away.
  At the crack of dawn the next day, his mother and sister went down to
the river to wash and they oiled their bodies for the first time in years.
Their mourning years were over. They set off to his homestead. He was
very happy to see them again and he gave them beer and beef and other
nice food. When it was evening, they stood up to go and he accompanied
them a short way and invited them to visit him again. On the days when
they did not go to see him, he used to send them things as presents. Soon
his sister began to look round and sleek, and her beauty began to show. The
other girls became jealous of her.
   As time went on, Ngangezwe went more and more often to his old
father’s homestead to drink beer and to mix freely with his father’s people.
Soon the people began to return his visits and they began to like him a lot.
But none of them guessed that he was Ngangezwe.
  One day he gathered all his people and told them to go along with him
to the great place of his father. That day he was resolved to tell everyone
who he really was. As he approached the gate he saw a number of his for¬
mer entourage standing by themselves at the gate of the cattle kraal. He
strode up to them and introduced himself: “I am Ngangezwe!” They were
startled and they wondered, then they began to rejoice. They laughed and
danced and sang. There was a great deal of rejoicing. Then appeared on the
scene the King, his father, and Mnyamana, his brother. He faced them, and
told them again: “I am Ngangezwe!” The King at first went faint. He could
not talk. I cannot even tell you how happy the King was then.
  Mnyamana suffered a great shock when he saw that this was indeed
Ngangezwe. But Ngangezwe spoke to him gently and told him not to be
afraid for he would never hurt him. With time Mnyamana relaxed and


                       The Story of Ngangezwe and Mnyamana            ♦   119
inwardly he was happy that he still had his brother alive and well.
   Soon after these events, the King declared that as an old man he was
ready to step down as king and for Ngangezwe to take his place as the
young king. Ngangezwe consented and Mnyamana happily became his
great headman. Ngangezwe’s mother’s hut was returned to its proper place
and his sister married a great king of another country.

                                    Transcribed by Mrs. Hugh Lancaster Carbutt
                                                    Translated by Lauretta Ngcobo




          Anonymous, THE WAR IN ZULULAND
                          South Africa 1884       English


This essay was written by one of the earliest pupils at Inanda Seminary in the
colony of Natal. It is part of a series of essays by pupils that were copied into an
exercise book and presented to the principal, Mary Edwards, in 1884. As such, it
is the earliest known record of African schoolgirls’ writing from the KwaZulu-
Natal region. None of the essays has been published before. Sadly, the names of the
contributors were not recorded.
   Inanda Seminary, South Africa’s Mount Holyoke, was established on the thriv¬
ing mission station of Daniel and Lucy Lindley in 1869. They had been active in
southern Africa since the late 1830s, as part of the effort by the American Board of
Commissioners for Foreign Missions to establish a presence “in the land of the
Zulu kings.” In this task the American Board was at first spectacularly unsuccess¬
ful, as their missionaries were caught up in the social upheavals, called the mfecane,
associated with the rise of the Zulu state under King Shaka. When some sort of
social peace was brought to the region in the 1840s, the Lindleys again took up mis¬
sion work in Natal at Inanda, some thirty miles to the northwest of Durban, then
named Port Natal. The local chief, Mqhawe, became friendly after he realized the
potential material benefits of an association with the missionaries, such as plows,
horses, and education. A further reason for there being a cordial relationship was
that among the converts at the station were some close relatives of the chief includ¬
ing his grandmother, uncle, and cousin. His uncle, James Dube, was one of the first
ordained African ministers in Natal, and his cousin was none other than James’s
son, John, founding president of the African National Congress (ANC) in 1912.
   The missionaries (especially the missionary wives) felt strongly that unless the
men being trained as leaders of the new Christian community were able to find
suitable marriage partners, only half of the church’s future was really ensured. The
Lindleys fought hard for the establishment of a women’s training center, and real¬
ized their dreams with the opening of Inanda Seminary. It was the first school of
its kind in southern Africa, catering as it did exclusively to African girls who had
already received a primary education. In time, it attracted young women from all
over southern and central Africa. For the early pupils at the seminary, life could
not have been easy. The redoubtable first head, Mary Kelly Edwards, exercised a
severe if kindly authority: All incoming letters were vetted (and confiscated if


120 * Nineteenth Century
deemed unsuitable); the girls had to collect water, grow food, keep the campus
clean, and do their own laundry; at weekends, they had to assist in mission work;
and all in addition to their studies. Yet for those who stayed, the rewards were
potentially great: Nearly all the “firsts” for African women in South Africa—first
qualified African theater sister (senior nurse in a hospital operating theater), first
African sister tutor (senior nurse qualified to instruct trainees), first African
woman doctor, and so on—belong to Inanda Seminary girls. Some neither sought
nor won fame in their own right, but rather as helpmates to well-known husbands,
such as Nokutela Dube, first wife of John Dube. All these women were in the fore¬
front of the creation of an African middle class in South Africa.
   The essay reproduced here reminds us that it was not only white settlers who
feared the might of the independent Zulu state; so too did the many African
refugees who had fled from it. (The “scattering” of refugees continued from the
1820s until well into the 1860s.) It is a vivid account of the onset of a momentous
event—the Anglo-Zulu War of 1879 and the conquest of the Zulu kingdom under
its king, Cetshwayo—written from the point of view of a young woman whose clan
sought to avoid the conflict. It presents an as-yet unheard voice, for nearly all the
surviving accounts—whether from the “official mind” of British imperialism, ordi¬
nary foot soldiers, or a perspective “through Zulu eyes”—are overwhelmingly male.
This account by a young woman is therefore extremely rare, a perfect counterbal¬
ance to the story told by Paulina Dlamini from the Zulu side of the war (see
“Flight of the Royal Household”).
                                                                      Heather Hughes


                                          ♦

A long time ago, when we had not yet come to study in this school, we
began to fear that there was going to be a war between the Zulus and the
white people. They said that the white people wanted Cetywayo [Zulu
king as of 1872] to be caught because he was troubling people very much,
and killing many people who wanted to be Christians. At first we could
not believe that it was true. We thought that they were deceiving us, but
soon we saw people coming away from Zululand. Some came to my home,
they were afraid, because they thought there was going to be a war, and we
saw some missionaries and their people, and many others who had run
away from their houses, and still we could not believe it, but some old peo¬
ple said to us, “Look at the field, and see how much food there is this year,
and look too at the birds, and see how many there are.” They think these
birds go when there is going to be a war.
   When I heard them talking I was glad for I thought I should like to see
the people scattered, as I had heard my Mother talk about how they were
scattered by the war when she was a girl but my Mother said to me, You
would not be glad if you had seen that time, because you would have had
no house to sleep in, and no food to eat.” A few months after this they told
us that the soldiers were coming to Durban to fight with the Zulus, and
after a few days we saw some soldiers, and when they came to my house
they stopped near there for a little while.

                                                  The War in Zululand          ♦   121
  We ran away to stand on a hill, and saw them when they stopped, but
we were much afraid to go to the river for water, but my Father told us to
go after him, and said “They will not do anything to you, I will go with
you,” and so we went and came home without any hurt, but while my
Father was still at the river, some of the soldiers came to our house and we
ran away to Zinkala’s house and stood there till my Father came to call us,
and told us to go back home.
  When we were at home my Father told us to go and light a lamp in the
house, for we were in the kitchen, then I was afraid to go alone, but my
Father scolded me, and told me to go, so I went running very fast, and
looking round me all the way to see what was coming after me.
  Just as soon as I was in the house, I was looking for matches. I looked
through the window and saw some soldiers coming. I lighted the lamp very
quickly. They came to the door, just when I was ready to scream, I saw my
Father coming, and I was very glad.
  My Father told them to go away. Some of the people asked the soldiers
what they were going to Zululand for, and they said “Tina hamba
Cetywayo” [“We are going after Cetywayo”] and the people said, “Where
is Cetywayo—is he waiting for you in any place” but they only said “Tina
hamba Cetywayo.” They started to go to Idlilshwani, and then we saw oth¬
ers passing, and we heard that they were crossing the uTugela river
[between Natal and the Zulu kingdom], and then I began to believe that
they were really going to fight.
  After a time, they called for some black people to go with them to
Zululand, and all the people around my home were gathered together both
young and old men, but the old men were sent home for they had no
strength to fight and they were very glad because they were afraid of the
Zulu people.
  Their friends were very glad too, but we whose friends went were not
glad, because we were afraid they would not come back, but we said, “They
will not die, if it is not their time to die.” The black soldiers were then
taught by the white people to march as they do—and guns were given
them to shoot with, and some of the young men were very glad, because
they thought they would gain a great name among the people. Always at
night two of them were sent to stay on the fields, so that they could see
when the Zulu people were coming, and if they saw anyone coming, they
were taught to say “Who comes here” and if they did not answer right away
they were killed.
  The Zulus came and fought with the white people. Sometimes they
conquered them, and sometimes they did not, but the white people over¬
came them at last by something which the people called umtubumtulu
[word unknown], because they could shew these things a long way, and
then they would know where the people [were].
  The black people did not help them very much in the war because the
white people were not willing for them to go and fight, but used to tell


122   ♦   Nineteenth Century
them to stay under the waggons, when the battle was over, then they told
the black people to go after them, and kill those who were wounded.
  We were very much afraid when we were at home, because we thought
the Zulu people would cross the Tugela and kill us, because we heard that
they said they were going to cross the Tugela, and were going to eat sweet
food in Durban and in Pietermaritzburg, but the white people were wise,
they put some soldiers at the place where they were to cross. We heard that
they did cross in one place and that they killed a woman and her baby.
  Tho’ we were afraid we did not go anywhere because we did not know
where to go, and we just went to our gardens to weed because it was the
time for weeding.
   One night as we had just finished our supper we heard a great scream¬
ing of “Ingene,” “Ingene” [“It has entered,” meaning the Zulu army had
entered the colony], and so we were very much afraid, we did not know
what to do or where to go. My Father went and put a saddle on the horse
quickly, and he called Zonakile’s brother and said, “Did you hear what they
said.” Then they took their things and came home to run away with us.
  Just then we saw some black people running from the battle, they were
our people, but we thought they were Zulus so we ran away quickly.
  There were many of us, outside people [traditionalists, outside the
church] and station people [missionaries and their converts] and we did not
know where my Father was. When we were on the way we saw him coming
riding on a horse, he took my brother with him to see if it was true that the
Zulus had come, but we went on till we came to the Dhlumbete river, we
crossed it, and we stayed there at night, but we could not sleep, for we were
afraid. In the morning the boys went back home, and then they came back
to tell us, because the Zulus had not come, and so we went home.
   A few days after we heard that the Zulus had conquered the white peo¬
ple at Isandlwana [22 January 1879], and had killed many, both white and
black people who were at that place, and some of our friends who were at
this place were killed and they told us this, and we were very sorry.
   While they were still fighting, we came here to school, and after a long
time we heard that Cetywayo was taken—but the people of Zululand did
not stop fighting with each other. When their king was in England many
people from Zululand came to this country to work, and when we asked
them how they did in the war they said we were much afraid, but we were
not afraid of the guns, we were afraid of something they burned us with.
Some of them shewed us the place where the bullets had entered their
bodies, and when we asked them if they did not think they would die they
said yes, but we did not sit, because we were afraid that the soldiers would
come and finish us—they said we overcame in insobane [probably a place
name], we killed many white people there, and the white people were
much afraid. When they saw one of the Zulu people they said very nice
words to him and besought him not to kill them, but the Zulus did not lis¬
ten to them, they killed them.

                                             The War in Zululand      ♦   123
   They were very glad to hear their king was to come back again to his
own land and some who were in Natal went back to see their king.




                    Kambauruma Kazahendikey
                Two
                  Lions Who Changed
             Themselves into People and
             Married Two Herero Girls
                           Namibia 1886       otjiHerero


Herero tales are a mixture of fiction, myth, and historical event that carry a strong
moral message. They are intended to entertain and teach, thus contributing to the
process of creating socially responsible human beings. Older members of society,
especially grandmothers who are experts in the parts of the stories that are sung,
perform the tales, usually in the evenings around a fire just before bedtime. The
fire, the darkness, and the singing add mystery to the tales.
   Herero tales usually do not have titles. They are called           Ovimbaharere/
Ovipaharere, which means “things/events that almost happened.” Instead of “Once
upon a time,” they usually begin with A’pehara, otjipari. . ., which means “It almost
happened, then there was. . . .” The title used here is a translation of the German
given by the author or the editor, missionary Heinrich Brincker, to satisfy the
expectations of a European readership. Brincker notes in his introduction to his
collection of tales that the translations have been “critically reworked,” an example
of how texts and the cultural experiences they represented were shaped by the
interventions of missionaries.
   The story below was published in 1886 in an early German-Herero grammar
book, but had been collected earlier. In 1862 the Cape philologist Wilhelm Bleek wrote
that he received “five legends in oTyi-herero [sic] or Damara language as written down
by natives, copied and accompanied by a translation by the Rev. J. Rath.” According to
Brincker these “natives” were in fact “a Herero girl,” most probably Kambauruma
(Magdalena) Kazahendike, the sister of Urieta Kazahendikte (see text entitled “God’s
Peace and Blessing”), who also had a few tales published elsewhere. The text below
has been translated into English from the otjiHerero included by Brincker.
                                          Cons Uaraisa Karamata and Margie Orford


                                         ♦


There were two sisters, the one older than the other. They were left behind
when the others moved because the small stock that they were looking after
had strayed far. The people moved so fast that the girls could not find them,
they went into the field. There they married two lions; these lions had a
mother. But the older sister was not very clever, whereas the lions were very
cunning as they could turn into people. The lions went and stole small stock
and the girls cooked the meat. The girls were shocked at the way the lions
ate and the lions asked: “What are you scared of?” They answered: “Oh, it

124   ♦   Nineteenth Century
is nothing. Maybe we were just imagining things.” Then the lions asked:
“Did your father not have hair \omainja]}" And the sisters answered that he
did. Then the lions asked again: “What are you afraid of?”
  The lions then went hunting. While they were in the bush they turned
themselves into lions again. In the meantime the mother of the lions said
to the girls: “We are actually animals, thus you must flee from here.”
  The younger girl who was cleverer than the other said to her sister
“Please let us go.” They left and went into a omukaru [a type of tree]. The
older girl, who was stupid, said: “I am going back. In my view we live like
people who have little worries.” And they both returned.
  The next day the mother helped the girls escape, and they left. On their
way they saw cattle grazing and they went to the homestead. After they
had left, the lions came back to their home and asked their mother:
“Where are the girls?” The mother answered: “They said that they were
going to fetch firewood but I don’t know why they are taking so long.” The
lions went after the girls up to their homestead. Just as they came close to
the homestead they turned themselves into humans with musical instru¬
ments and entered the homestead.
   There was an empty house which was offered to them; they were also
offered omaere [fermented milk]. The mother and father told the girls to
keep the men company for the evening. The girls replied: “Please father,
why do you want this? Just see how our cattle will be finished off.” The
children refused. The father answered: “Just go and face the danger, sleep
but do not go into a deep sleep. Wake up in the middle of the night and tie
irons to their legs, but make sure not to make any noise. Wait until they are
asleep and then sneak out.” In the early hours of the morning the lions
woke up and turned back into lions and they moved on the livestock. Just
when they wanted to catch a cow, it bellowed and the cattle jumped up. The
lions then ran to the house and tuned back into humans. The people heard
the cattle lowing and the lions’ roars and saw how they changed. When the
lions were asleep again the girls woke each other up and took their things
and returned to their father’s house. He came to see whether the lions were
asleep and set the side wall of the house on fire. The lions moaned and
thrashed about but they could not get out. They were burnt to death.

                                                 Translated by Yahmillah Katjirua




           Olive Schreinery LEAVING THE FARM
                       South Africa 1886-1887         English


Novelist, short-story writer, political essayist, and a central figure in the develop¬
ment of white South African literature, Olive Schreiner was both derided and
acclaimed in her lifetime for her pioneering feminism, her rejection of Christian


                                                      Leaving the Farm        ♦   125
convention, and her anti-imperialism and antiracism. Born on 24 March 1855 in
Wittenbergen, on the border between the Cape Colony and Basutoland, at a
London Missionary Society station run by her parents, her adolescence and young
womanhood were spent largely in the Karoo district of the Cape Colony, first
(from the age of twelve) in the house of her brother and his family, helping with
the housekeeping, and thereafter on various farms, working as a governess. She
received no formal education.
   She left for England in 1881, aged twenty-six, with the manuscripts of three
novels in her suitcase. The Story of an African Farm (1883) brought her immediate
success. The other two, Undine (1928) and From Man to Man (1926), appeared
posthumously: The first, written between 1875 and 1877, Schreiner felt should
remain unpublished; the second she worked on for long stretches of her life, alter¬
nating between despair and exhilaration. During her lifetime Schreiner also pub¬
lished nonfiction, of which Woman and Labour (1911) is the most famous, and
allegorical fiction, among other works.
    Schreiner sent early versions of From Man to Man to Havelock Ellis, with whom
she had a close and long-standing friendship. The manuscript of the excerpt pub¬
lished here, dated in Schreiner’s hand, was written while she was staying in Alassio,
Italy, shortly before her return to South Africa in 1889 and her marriage to Samuel
Cronwright in 1892. After Schreiner’s death in 1920, her husband edited and pub¬
lished the novel. Schreiner’s revised version does not differ substantially from the
early version printed here, although there are stylistic changes. The original, how¬
ever, refers more closely to the connection between satisfaction in farm life and the
protagonist Rebekah’s need for books, and thus points to Schreiner’s own voracious
Karoo reading: books by Charles Darwin, Herbert Spencer, and J. S. Mill, to name
a few. As the novel turns out, Rebekah’s sexual hunger is redirected largely into
maternal interests, for her husband turns to other women. Although she falls in love
with a man of her own intellectual inclinations, she declines to run away with him.
Instead she gives him the “crown of her collection” from her premarriage days as an
amateur scientist: a fossil of a winged reptile. The winged reptile, a creature made
extinct in evolution, symbolized for Schreiner a female potential extinguished in the
apparent progress of human existence.
   In this extract, Rebekah as yet knows nothing of the psychic enfeeblement that
marriage would bring, although there is an inkling of the forthcoming complexi¬
ties of ethical choice in a world dominated by the inequalities of gender, class, and
race. The pacing ox in this excerpt becomes, in later chapters, a restless woman
pacing up and down her room, rehearsing to herself arguments and counterargu¬
ments about the ethics of historical and contemporary life.
                                                                     Dorothy Driver


                                         ♦

At nine o’clock that night Rebekah sat on the “stoep”. It was a dark night;
the nightflies buzzed about at intervals. She sat on the step opposite the
door with her back to it; a square of light fell from the open door across the
“stoep”, & dimly onto the stems of the orange trees beyond. She sat with
her elbows on her knees looking into the dark. After a while she looked
back: through the open door she could see her little mother sitting in the


126   ♦   Nineteenth Century
corner of the room in the rocking chair, rocking herself and smiling: Percy
Lawrie the new master was at the piano playing, Bertie was standing by him
turning over the music for him bending so low her brown hair almost
touched his. She could see her lover lying on the sofa with his large arm
thrown across his forehead listening to the music; 8c in the room beyond
her father at the bare deal table reading, his black beard pressed against his
chest, his black hair falling in a heavy lock over his forehead as he was
intent on his book. She looked in for a while 8c then she looked away again.
  What was she leaving it for, that quiet peaceful life?—she folded her
arms on her knees. What did she leave it for? The light streamed out from
the door, and lay in a square just behind her. To-night, almost too late, she
took up the old balances 8c began to weigh again. What was she leaving it
for, this quiet peaceful life?—The blue eyes 8c yellow hair of her cousin
Frank?—she loved him, better than her mother, as well as her father, only a
little less than her sister: better than her microscope 8c collection of insects,
as well as her grafting 8c her experiments, only less than her books. When
she was dead she would be buried with these all round her, at her side at her
feet, at her head, the books! What was she leaving it for? It was a quiet
peaceful life in which the right was the pleasantest 8c easiest to do, 8c lay
right ahead, in which there was no being torn asunder living between “I
would” 8c “I must”; a life in which there was just so much to be done for
others as might yield a grateful sense of selfsatisfaction. A dreamy placid
life into which the noisy, babbling, worried worrying world crept only once
a week through the post bag of the boy who brought the letters from the
town. A peaceful, studious life, in which one might grow wise exceedingly
8c suck what joy there is from plants 8c stones; a studious thoughtful life, in
which one might read, 8c creep into the heart of books as can only be when
the wheels of the daily life are grinding soft 8c low. A life in which suffer¬
ing was small 8c pleasure was large. What was she leaving it for? She looked
back again into the room. The scale looked heavy. On the other side was,—
well,—nothing,—only a vague insatiable hunger. Books, black-beetles, well
performed duties; she had tried them all, they were chaff! She was dying of
hunger. What the far off blue 8c purple mountains whisper of when they
say, “Come! come! come! We have that to give you that you know not of;
come! come! come! to us!” That she was hungry for.
  When an ox is dying of hunger 8c thirst 8c left at the road-side it does not
lie down, it walks up 8c down, up 8c down, up 8c down. It does not lie still.
   She folded her arms on her knees 8c decided as before.




                                                   Leaving the Farm       ♦   127
          Eliza Feilderiy PORTRAIT OF LOUISA
                           South Africa 1887       English


The portrait of Louisa in Eliza Feilden’s memoir, My African Home; or, Bush Life
in Natal, was written in 1852-1853 but not published until 1887. It is one of the
earliest portraits of a young African woman in Port Natal (Durban), memorable
especially for Feilden’s (mis)representation of Louisa’s speaking for herself. All that
is known of Louisa is what Feilden reports: She and her mother were refugees
from the territory of an Mpondo chief, Faku, on the Umzimvubu River in the pres¬
ent border area between KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape. They probably fled
up the coast in the early 1830s after a struggle over land and cattle between the
Mpondo and their Zulu neighbors.
  Louisa worked for six months for Feilden as a servant in her farmhouse, which
was situated a few hours’ ride from the new European settlement at the bay. While
African men often sought service with settler families, it was unusual for a young
woman to do so because marriage, children, and work in the family homestead and
fields were expected of them. Louisa seems to have had an independent outlook,
which may account for her conversion to Christianity and her interest in the edu¬
cation offered by missionaries.
   When Louisa decides to marry, Feilden sees her as “selfish”—a view she ration¬
alizes by noting Louisa’s sacrifice of the opportunity to learn more of the language
(English) and the skills that would be “useful to her people.” Feilden’s assumption
that Louisa would attain “reasoning” power and would progress through contact
with settler culture is typical of the period; what is perhaps less so is Feilden’s gen¬
uine, though patronizing, interest in her young servant’s outlook and her pleasure
in recounting what she sees as Louisa’s quaint deeds. When Feilden reproaches
Louisa for her inadequate sense of duty, she is prompted by her class-biased atti¬
tudes as well as her sense of racial superiority. Elsewhere in her memoir she records
much harsher criticisms of her white servants.
   Leyland Feilden, Eliza’s husband, was the youngest son of Sir William Feilden
of Feniscowles Hall, Lancashire, England. He first came to Natal under the Byrne
(assisted) immigration scheme and returned for the second time almost immedi¬
ately after his marriage, arriving with Eliza in May 1852. yBecause he was relatively
rich, the Feildens were able to return to England after several floods hit their sec¬
ond farm and sugar mill at Springfield in 1856. This was not an option open to
many immigrant settlers.
                                                                        M. J. Daymond


                                           ♦


Our white servants were leaving us; we had had a narrow escape of a well-
spoken Scotchwoman from Drummond Castle, so we engaged a fine,
strong, tall Caffre girl from the missionaries, called “Louisa.” She under¬
stands English pretty well, and appears to be willing and quick, but I
should not like her to put her hands in the bread till I can teach her to be
thoroughly clean and nice in her habits, so I must be the bread-maker for
a time. She shrugs her shoulders, but does the thing I tell her, but will not


128   ♦   Nineteenth Century
obey Gudgeon, who has managed to get taken back. Before we set out
from the bay, Louisa came into the parlour in her pink print and squatted
herself on the floor, looking very resolved. She “would not go with
Gudgeon to the farm,” she would “go with missis.” I explained that we
were riding and would go too fast for her; then she would follow, but not
with Gudgeon, to whom she has taken a dislike. How they arranged I
know not, but both made their appearance. She “was sorry there would be
no school.” I undertook to teach her, so as soon as she had washed up she
brought her Zulu Genesis, and I heard her read her chapter; I afterwards
found she understood my reading of Zulu better than her own, though I
only knew what 1 read by consulting my English Bible. [. . .]
  My Durban white servant came to us for a few days, but some heavy
rains drove her away, and we were left with only Louisa and Gudgeon.
Gudgeon would cook and plagued us; Louisa was willing, but knew noth¬
ing. I many a time wished I had spent an hour a day in the kitchen in
England, for I felt as ignorant of cooking almost as Louisa. She is a nice
creature, but wilful, and the difficulty of teaching her to understand in
English first what she is to do, then how she is to do it, and lastly, seeing
that she does it, is very fatiguing. She comes to me, “What me do now?”
Her mind is active, and her body strong. If we can only have patience with
her she may turn out a fine creature and learn to be very useful, but you
cannot reason with one of another language, who has no ideas upon daily
duties. She reads pretty well in Zulu, and opens my English books with a
sort of longing look. She opened my little sketch-book, I turned to where
some figures were squatted. “Oh, Caffres!” she cried, with a merry laugh. I
pointed to herself under the tree, and Gudgeon, but she did not think it
like her.
   She came to me on Saturday, “You know me want?”
   “What do you want, Louisa?”
   “Me want go church, all man love God; go church, not work Sunday.”
   “Quite right, Louisa, you shall go to church. I cannot walk so far, so we
have church here to worship God. You must come soon back at night.”
   “No! me stay all night, me go church, me not work, God rest.” So I sup¬
pose we must help ourselves on a Sunday in future.
   She was back before seven in the morning on Monday, having walked
from the station, a distance of six or seven miles. She said the service was
part in English and part in Caffre, and they taught her to read. She would
like to learn everything, provided I go with her, and do as much as she. I
asked if she would like to teach her people. She replied, “Yes, but they not
like to learn.” When she brings her “Genesis” and seats herself on the floor
at my feet, I am reminded of the Eastern saying of the maid sitting at her
mistress’s feet. It sounds very pretty as a picture, a dark shining skin and
eyes, a pink frock, and the Bible in her hand; but in reality she is a great,
clumsy, wallopping young woman in rags, though she can sew well. But
there is something nice about her, and when she can understand us better,


                                               Portrait of Louisa     *   129
we may be able to reason with and teach her many things. She has taken a
great fancy to my sketch-book, and is always turning over the leaves. [. . .]
  I have drawn a pretty picture of my dark maiden, Louisa, just such an one
as the missionaries would seize upon for their reports, which take with the
benevolent at home; but it is the sunny side. She is a fine, able-bodied crea¬
ture, about five feet eight or ten in height, and very stout and thick-set. She
looks magnificent as she appears coming up the steep hill out of the wood,
with her bucket of water on her head and branches of green standing in it to
keep the water steady, her form or bench (for she has been washing) under
her arm, and walking erect. But, though active-minded, she is very idle,
spares labour on everything, is never anxious to oblige, or to do a single thing
she is not ordered to set about. She loves eating as all Caffres do, and stuffs
till she is stupid, and then I have to do all, instead of three parts of the work.
She talks of love to God, but does not strive to please her mistress, and, so
far as I can judge, she does not know that she is a sinner, and yet I suppose
she is as good a specimen of a convert to Christianity as most of those—the
accounts of whom draw tears—in books or at meetings. She went to church
as usual in the afternoon, but I told her she must be back before six in the
morning to make breakfast. She arrived when I was washing the breakfast
things and putting them away, and expressed no regret. [. . .]
   Louisa is a strange, untutored creature; she observed that I look out for
my husband when I expect his return of an evening. She came to me one
day saying he was visible. I went out to look, but he was hid from sight by
bushes. I stood a moment looking. Louisa came behind (she is a sort of
giantess), seized me round the ankles, and lifted me into the air, to look
over the bushes! I was powerless as a struggling infant in her grasp. At last
she set me down with a merry laugh at my discomfiture. She has got a new
blue frock now, and did her best to wait at our Christmas party, as well as
two Caffres in their best, i.e. they wore a bob of scarlet worsted the size of
a pomegranate flower on their foreheads, and brass bracelets; beyond a few
strips of rags the size of a philabeg hanging down before and behind, their
shining dark skin of nature’s bestowing was their only other covering. They
drank our healths and seemed to enjoy the fun as much as any of us.
   Louisa has gone off to visit her mother for a week. She has only been
eight weeks with me, yet she must have as much holiday as she asks.
   “Who will do your work, Louisa?” said I.
   “I don’t know, ma’am.”
   “Am I to clean the pans, Louisa?”
   “Oh no, ma’am!”
   “Who then?” She shrugged her shoulders, and suggested “Boy.”
   “But Boy is busy in the garden; don’t you think you could find me a good
girl to do your work if I let you go?”
   “No, ma’am, no Caffre girl, only one Caffre girl at Mr. B-s.”
   “But you could find one, I think?”
   “No, ma’am, no girl, they all wife.”


130   ♦   Nineteenth Century
   So I must manage as I can until Louisa chooses to return. But with all
her faults she is truthful and honest. [. . .]
  About this time (February, 1853) I observed a smartly-dressed Caffre
man came occasionally to pay his respects to Louisa. I guessed what the
result must be, so I spoke to her, and she frankly tells me she “tink she like
him. Him pray in me in church.” And soon she told me when I paid her
wages, that she must go away, and live at the mission where her lover is;
and so she set off, crying when I told her she ought not to leave me unpro¬
vided with another, it was ungrateful after all I had taught her. She
shrugged her shoulders and was very sorry, but selfishness prevailed, and
she set off there and then. Louisa has interested me greatly. She has con¬
siderable reasoning powers, and was so desirous to learn to read English,
and was beginning to speak and understand it so well, that I wonder she
did not see her interest in remaining a little longer. She was very truthful;
only once have I known her persist in an untruth. I have known her after
a first denial and a little hesitation say, “Yes, ma’am, I did.” She took a great
fancy to my India-rubber galoshes, telling me they were too large for me,
and when I found them split down the front I accused her of trying them
on her own great foot. She denied, but I fear she had done it. Louisa is only
sixteen years old, but full-grown, and her lover is twenty. Under a mis¬
sionary she may become useful to her people, though her knowledge is
scanty, and her mental education slow. She tells me she is a fugitive Zulu
from Faku’s country, where her father was killed. Her mother snatched her
up on her back, and as she was running off, the child got struck on the
back, where she always feels a pain during a cold. She would on no account
go back to Faku’s land. All in Natal are similar fugitives, and prefer being
under English rule, as safer and less tyrannical.




         Adele Mabille, PENELOPA LlENGUANE
                              Lesotho 1888       English


Adele Mabille was the daughter of Eugene Casalis, one of the three missionaries
invited by Moshoeshoe, founder of the Basotho kingdom, to settle in his territory
and teach his people modern learning. The Christian mission that was established
thereafter could be regarded as “national in the best sense of the word,” to quote
Victor Ellenberger in A Century of Mission Work in Basutoland: 1833—1933 (1936),
for the king not only protected it but also held the initiative for change in his hands.
Mabille’s essay reflects something of the relations that may have existed between
the Basotho and the French missionaries. The tone of the document is strikingly
free of condescension toward “Natives” and “Kaffirs.” In addition, Mabille accepts
gifts of money and food from the convert about whom she writes, a reciprocity that
has been expunged from most colonial records. In Botswana, Khama Ill’s financial
contributions to the appeals of Christian fund-raisers concerned about the English
poor have been expunged in a similar manner.

                                                    Penelopa Lienguane ♦ 131
  Adele Mabille’s husband, Adolphe Mabille, was the editor of Leselinyane la
Lesuto when it was first established in 1863, and by the time of the Gun War,
hinted at in her piece, he was the head of the French missionaries at Morija. This
war was part of a general disarmament war in which the British colonial adminis¬
tration based in Cape Town undertook to disarm black people who had bought
guns with the money they had earned as workers in South African mines and
industries and on farms. Lesotho’s turn to be disarmed came in 1880.
  The history of the missions, as officially reported, very often revolves not
around missionary wives but their husbands. For this reason it is not generally
known that Adele Mabille translated from and into Sesotho for her husband.
  The Basutoland Evangelist, in which the piece appeared in 1888, was founded
with the dual purpose of informing the European public about mission work and
raising funds for the mission.
                                                                   Leloba Molema


                                       ♦

[Penelopa] Lienguane was one of the first to give us a warm welcome when
we arrived at Morija 29 years ago. She used to walk once a fortnight from
Kolo, a distance of 12 miles, to spend the Sunday on the station. Our lit¬
tle children soon learnt to consider her as their greatest friend. The day
before our eldest son left us to go to France for his education she came to
bid him good-bye. “You cannot think what a trial it is for me to part with
your child,” she said to me. “Were you a mosuto woman, I would ask you
to give me that child to bring up, as the Lord has made me childless, but
it cannot be. This child must be educated so that he may return to teach
my people.” Then placing 10s. in my hand, she said: “This is to buy food
on the road for him.” The following year she brought me £1 to help to pay
for her boy’s schooling. The year after, she brought a larger sum; I
expressed my astonishment at her generosity. “I cultivate a small field lor
that purpose and you shall have every penny that field produces for him.”
One year when our crops had suffered a great deal through hail, she
brought me T2.10 for the same purpose. I begged her to allow me to return
the money for that year at least, as I knew her fields had been destroyed by
the hail. “No,” said she, “the Lord has given it to me for my child and he
shall have it.”
   It will be a satisfaction to our friends to know that the Lord has granted
her the wish of her heart, which was that “her boy” should become a mis¬
sionary to her people, and what is more, he has brought out a bride from
Scotland.
   “Where there is a will, there is a way,” is a proverb that good woman
constantly puts into practice. I have often wondered where she manages to
get all the money she gives so generously, receiving as she does only a
salary of about £7, besides a few extras. Yet her collection towards the
church funds is never under Tl, besides giving also for the Barotse Mission
and other works. When we began the Normal School 20 years ago, it was


132   ♦   Nineteenth Century
in war time and after a great famine. We had not much to give the pupils
except crushed maize and native bread. A small flock of sheep and goats
belonging to Lienguane had escaped when the cattle of Basutoland were
captured by the Boers. Every now and then our cook would pretend she
sadly wanted a bit of meat to make soup of, and would send for one of her
sheep. When once the meat was ready, she would say to me: “Send me
those poor boys, don’t you see that they are just starving for a bit of meat?”
And so the whole of the little flock went. Then when once the first boys
left the school to go out as catechists and school masters, when they hap¬
pened to return to Morija, they were sure to find a nice roasted fowl ready
to receive them, or would carry away a little dress for the baby from nkhono
(grandmother) as she loved to call herself. All these little works of love are
supposed to be known by the Lord only, for she never boasts of what she
does, and I once got a good scolding for having thoughtlessly spoken of
what she did for our son before one of the little ones, who immediately ran
to ask her to give her some of the money she gave for her brother. “How
could you speak of such a thing,” said she, “I thought this was to be
between ourselves and the Lord?” I never met with a native woman with
such a large heart as hers. Her heart seems especially to overflow with love
and pity for the heathen, and some years ago her holidays were spent on an
evangelizing tour, first in one district, then in another. I believe she has
been over all Basutoland in this way. One good woman who usually accom¬
panied her once said to me: “I really do not understand how Lienguane
manages, but she has only to enter a house for all the children to come to
her, and at once she begins to teach them a text or a verse of a little hymn.
She has no trouble to get the women around her, and when she leaves a vil¬
lage she is already the friend of every body.”
   Some years ago, being in bad health, my husband and I were advised to
take a journey through the Transvaal. We were at the same time to look out
for a field of labour for the Swiss Mission. Before setting out, Lienguane
came and asked as a favour to be allowed to accompany us. “You are my
missionary’s daughter and I have a right to care for you.” I shall never for¬
get her activity, her constant cheerfulness throughout all the fatigues of our
five months journey. We had laid in a supply of dried bread and biscuit,
such as is always made for a long journey in Africa. Yet we had fresh bread
baked regularly all through the journey. This kind soul would knead her
dough when we rested at midday, and in the evening baked it in a flat pot;
often I would say to her: “We can get on very well with biscuits, for you
are really too tired to bake to-day.” “No, no,” she would say, “I promised
when I left Basutoland that I would care for you.” Only those who have
some experience of African travelling can understand the self-sacrifice it
required to bake bread after a hard day’s travelling. Some days after our
return to Morija, she came to thank us for having taken her with us, and
laid down £1 as a thankoffering to the Lord for having brought us all back
safely; nor did she seem to realise how greatly we were indebted to her, for


                                              Penelopa Lienguane       ♦   133
she would never receive the least compensation for all the fatigue and work
of the five months campaign. This also she did for her Lord. He alone
knows what an encouragement, what a comfort this dear woman has
always heen to us. How often when my husband has been almost crushed
by some grievous sin amongst our people has she come matselisong (a visit
of condolence) to us. uMy children,’ she would say, do not lose heart, the
enemy is strong, but Jesus is stronger than he. What is more, I have never
heard a word said against her, nor do I believe she has a single enemy, lor
she is a friend and a mother to all.
   Some time since we were taking a review of the work done during the
late years, and she seemed rather down hearted at the thought of the num¬
ber of young men who had left our Normal School and who were not
engaged in the Lord’s work. She seemed almost to find that she had spent
her strength for nought. My husband, to cheer her, began to count up
those of “her boys” who were at work and we found upwards of seventy.
Since that the number has increased.
   I would fain add that all our Basutoland converts are such bright sterling
Christians as the one I am writing about; far from it; yet thank God, there
are some who are shining lights in the midst of the darkness around us.




 Susiwe Bengu, TESTIMONY OF A SCHOOL GlRL
                          South Africa 1892       English


Susiwe Bengu arrived at Inanda Seminary on 6 August 1892. She had run away
from her family home because her father, Dhlokolo, himself a chief, had agreed
that one of his daughters should be chosen to be the youngest wife of a much older
man, the chief Bulushe, and Susiwe had been selected. Presumably she fled to
Inanda Seminary because it was known to offer protection to young women in her
predicament (see the headnote to “The War in Zululand”). The seminary probably
had to struggle to keep her. The school’s records indicate that her father tried sev¬
eral times to get her away from the school, and the local magistrate and the secre¬
tary of native affairs in Natal would normally have insisted that “runaways”
(especially if they were from families of chiefs) be returned so as not to disturb this
aspect of patriarchal power. The record from which her statement is taken does not
indicate what eventually happened to Susiwe Bengu. The statement is signed in
her own hand but otherwise written down by someone else.
   Her flight is an indication of the profound social changes that were beginning in
the region: The school is seen as a “haven” by Bengu, but its very existence is also
part of the causes of these long-term transformations. Young Zulu women also ran
away from the strict regime at the seminary, as Inanda’s early register indicates. For
their part, the missionaries gave highly propagandistic accounts of their protection
of young women. However charged the issues were at this time, it took a great deal
of courage for a young Zulu-speaking woman to resist parental authority.
                                                                       Heather Hughes


134   *   Nineteenth Century
About eight years ago, I think it was, when I was a young girl, the chief
Bulushe, a very old man, talked with my father about getting one of his
daughters. My father was willing, so the chief sent ten of his younger sons
to choose one for him. I was the one chosen, but I refused and kept refus¬
ing my father kept trying to make me go but he did not force me to go,
and while the matter was still being talked about, Bulushe died. Then his
oldest son, Sidada, who had several wives and was old, said that if I had
consented to his father, he could not say anything, but now he would take
me as he did the other things of his father. I refused, but his messengers
came many times—and he came—they said to my father, “We have many
things, we will give you anything you choose to ask for, besides the cattle.”
My father kept pressing me to go till at last I went to that man’s kraal, but
I did not stay in his hut. There were many people there. I was sent home
with twenty cattle, but when they wanted me to go back with the beer, I
refused till at last my mother went and took it for me. My father became
very angry because I kept refusing to go, and said to me as he was going
away for a few days, “If you do not have the beer made when I get back and
go with it, you will be taken.” After he went I heard that I was really to be
taken there when he came home, so I watched for a chance to get away, and
came here to you.
                                                              Susiwe Bengu




                                     Testimony of a School Girl       ♦   135
1900   TO   1919
A
    A. M. van den Berg, JOURNAL OF THE WAR
                     South Africa 1900      Afrikaans/Dutch


Mrs. A. M. van den Berg gave her war journal to an English woman, Emily
Hobhouse, in July 1903, while Hobhouse was gathering information about Boer
families who had been allowed to return to their farms at the end of the Anglo-
Boer War of 1899-1902. Most were destitute since their buildings, crops, and live¬
stock had been systematically destroyed by the British army during the war.
Hobhouse did not manage to translate the many statements she collected until
1924. Thirty of them were published shortly after her death in War without
Glamour. They provide an early account of the massive civilian suffering that
occurs in modern warfare.
   Hobhouse, the daughter of a clergyman, was born in Cornwall, England, in
1860. She organized a huge rally in London for women to protest against the
Anglo-Boer War. Once in South Africa in December 1900, she witnessed two infa¬
mous aspects of General Horatio Kitchener’s campaign: the destruction of the
farms of all combatants and the internment of their wives and children. Carrying
the war to the women was a deliberate strategy to hasten the capitulation of Boer
husbands and sons.
   Hobhouse’s revelations of the dreadful conditions in the camps so angered
Alfred Milner’s government in Cape Town that, on her second visit in October
1901, she was not allowed to disembark and was forcibly returned to England.
Once peace had been signed in May 1902, she again came to South Africa. During
this and her next visit, as she collected the testimonies of Boer women, she saw
starvation everywhere. Recognizing that their survival would depend on self-help,
Hobhouse determined to assist Boer women to develop home industries. After a
further three years in South Africa she was compelled by her own worsening
health to return to England. In honor of her work, she was invited in 1913 by
President M. T. Steyn of the Orange Free State to unveil the Afrikaner women’s
memorial in Bloemfontein, but, although she traveled to South Africa, she was too
ill to attend the ceremony. Her ashes are interred at the monument.
    The van den Berg family farm, Witpoort, was in the eastern Transvaal, about
thirteen miles south of the small town of Roossenekal to which the women and
children fled after their farm was burned. There they were captured by the British
and moved to a temporary camp at Middelburg, where van den Berg’s daughter-in-
law and her newborn child died, along with hundreds of others, because of unsan¬
itary conditions, cold, and starvation. General Louis Botha estimated that twenty
thousand women and children died in the camps, in comparison with the four thou¬
sand Boer men who were killed fighting. In Boer War Letters (1984), Hobhouse
describes what she saw on an evening visit to “the largest” of the Middelburg camp
graveyards: “rows upon rows of children’s graves, most bearing the date of that fatal
July written on a bit of paper and put in a glass bottle.”
   After four months in Middelburg, van den Berg was moved to a camp in
Durban where she spent the remaining months of the war. After meeting her,
Hobhouse wrote in a letter that van den Berg talked a great deal about the camps

                                                   Journal of the War ♦ 139
in her mystic Transvaal way, but ended by saying the ‘Man Above’ had allowed it,
so it must have been for the best.”
                                                                 M. J. Daymond
                                       ♦


On the 13th [October 1900] before sunrise the enemy came to Witpoort.
They remained by our dwelling over six hours in order to carry out their
work of destruction. They drove their horses into our lands (viz. cultivated
ground) and they carried away over 7,000 sheaves of oats. A large piece of
oatland was not yet cut; that they destroyed. Our potatoes, the crop from
four sacks of seed, were also destroyed by the enemy. Our stable, wagonhouse
and kraals were plundered and ruined. All the pigs and feathered stock they
beat to death. A new wagon they took away with them and burnt the other
wagon. I asked them why they took one wagon and burnt the other. A man
gave me this answer: “The reason is that when the wagons used by the
Commandos are worn out, then they come and take fresh wagons with
which to fight.”
  I answered him then: “Our men do not fight with wagons.”
  Thereupon said he: “You must bring in your husband and sons with
their mausers.”
  Then I made answer: “You will not catch the men, for even with your
great power you have not yet gone through the country. The railway is in
your possession, but that belongs to a company, not to you.”
  Then said he: “We have the villages in our possession.”
  “But our Government has given up the villages to the women and you
ought not to go into them at all.”
  In this way I replied to him.
  All that was in my dwelling-house was spared at that time; the reason
being that I asked the Commanding Officer for a guard to protect myself
and my house, which he granted me. I also asked him that the corn which
still stood on the land should not be destroyed which also he willingly
granted. So the standing corn was spared.       '
  On the 13th some of our men were again here and on the 14th my hus¬
band returned with the cattle.
  I had thought that the enemy would not come again but on the 14th
November, 1900, they came again from Belfast by the road over the farm
Schoonuitzicht, and reached Witpoort in the afternoon at 4 o’clock. After
they had first fired a cannonade with maxims over the house and trees,
they came up to my house. A man said to me:
  “Tante, I give you half an hour’s time to take what you want out of your
house for I am come to set it on fire.”
   I asked him: “Why will you burn the house? I am weak, suffering from
fever. What will become‘of me under the naked sky?”
   I spoke to the officer asking him to spare the house: he refused to do so.
I said to him:


140   ♦   1900 TO 1919
  “With God in Heaven there is mercy, have you then no mercy for a poor
woman? Because you cannot get the men into your hands will you fight the
women?”
  The man turned white, gave me no answer and rode away. The others
remained sitting upon their horses. One of them said:
  “Tante, this is an order and we must carry it out, but bring everything
out of the house that you can.”
  Then they dismounted and began to help me carry out the things, such
as the furniture in the sitting and dining rooms, the beds and other goods.
Also they brought out for me three sacks of corn and two sacks of meal.
They also helped my daughter-in-law to carry out her things. From my
storeroom I could save nothing for they refused to allow me to fetch any¬
thing from there except my veld-tent which a man carried out and gave
me. It speaks for itself that I could do nothing, being but just out of a sick
bed where I had lain for three months and my right arm was still power¬
less. I had spoken gently and had besought; but nothing availed—the
house must be burnt. When I went to the pantry to fetch something I
found a man there with two packets of fuel. He set fire to it. One packet
he threw upon the ceiling of the sitting room the other in a bedroom. The
flames rose up instantly in the gable of the house. I stood looking at it—
no pen can write what was in my heart. Suddenly flashed into my mind:
“Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord.” When I thought of this
I felt steadfast—the dear Lord has more than this to give me—but it was
terrible to see everything in flames. As the house stood in flames from
gable to gable they took the three sacks of corn and put them in the pas¬
sage of the house and threw the one sack of meal through the window of
the sittingroom.
   I asked them why they burnt my food: a man made answer: “Your hus¬
band gives you food.”
  I said then: “The devil thanks you for this: my husband has given me
food enough—but you have burnt it.”
   A Kaffir in the service of the enemy who stood gazing at the house as it
burnt said: “It is awful.”
   I remained silent.
   He said for the second time: “It is awful,” and added, “it is sin.’
   Then spoke I and said: “Yes, God will punish you for this.”
   Then they went back to their camp taking with them my two Kaffirs to
carry the goods plundered from me to their camp.
   My daughter Bettie then pulled the three sacks of corn out of the house
and with the help of my daughter-in-law saved also the sack of meal—all
lay outside on the flat. The houses and corn-stacks continued to burn. In
the smoke and heat we must get through the night under an oak tree.
   When my two Kaffirs came back I got them to put up my tent. We had
also two bucks ails (which we had made) which must serve for dwelling-
room and storeroom. [. . .]


                                               Journal of the War        ♦   141
      [6 October 1901] It is a pretty district, that of Mooi-rivier right on to
Pietermaritzburg, which town is pleasantly situated. There we received
corned beef to fortify us and condensed milk to refresh us. A great women’s
camp was there. We passed on to Durban, arriving at Merebank at 5
o’clock in the afternoon. From all directions the women came to greet us,
but were not allowed to speak to us; the Kaffir Police drove them away.
Then we got some coffee. Still they would not give us our bedding, so that
again we had to get through our night upon the hard benches of the train
without blanket or pillow. Believe me it was a hard journey from
Middelburg to Merebank, three days in open trucks and two days in third
class carriages without bedclothes.
   The following morning we had to go and give our names to the
Commandant and receive our tent numbers. Thence we went into the
camp to be given out tents, some of us remaining behind to keep an eye on
our goods. The trucks with our goods arrived and were all off-loaded in a
heap in the camp, with a Kaffir constable to guard it. After everything was
wet through with rain, came a man with some regard for us, who said each
must identify her goods and take them. All the things did not come
together, and I did not get mine till the fourth day. As regards the tents
some got square tents with sailcloths therein to spread upon the ground
which was sandy and soaking wet. Others got round tents. Next we had to
go and fetch our rations; doing this my daughter Bettie got wet in the rain,
and had to get through those days in her wet clothes and soaked shoes till
our goods came. We had each put a change of clothing in a portmanteau
to use whenever we should want it, but this was torn out of our hands at
Charlestown and thrown upon the goods train. You can understand what
an effect the soaking clothes had upon the health of one who had never
been used to live in such a way four days and nights. The weather was
stormy all the time; and the rain continued incessantly so that we had no
opportunity to dry ourselves in the sun. Disheartened, hungry, and weary
we dragged through our days in the wet tent. Happily we were able to bor¬
row some bedding and a pot in which to cook from borne people, otherwise
I do not know what would have become of us. Some suffered much with¬
out stretchers on the wet soaked ground.
   October 9: We rose up with renewed courage and asked the Lord for
strength to bear the lot that had befallen us. After sunrise we had to go
again to receive our bread, each person receiving a half loaf a day. The day
passed restfully and nothing happened except that we got good meat that
day; we felt a little more settled. It had been a long time since we last had
got meat. That afternoon we had worship, led by Mr. Luther, who prom¬
ised us to hold service every day. We sent to the Commandant to ask for
passes to go and look at the sea, which he refused us till the following
week.
  October 10: We celebrated the birthday of President Kruger in a festive
way, while silently in the inner chambers of our hearts a voiceless prayer


142     ♦   1900 TO 1919
rose to heaven for a blessing on him who is so full of years, that he might
be spared to see the end of this terrible war. We also trusted that he as our
Head would work on for us. The enemy hunted us round like dogs and
then sought to hide their infamy by saying that we were refugees.
  The Lord knows they dragged us away from our houses where we were
free and where we had plenty of everything and shut us up here in a camp
where we are not free and where we suffer want.
  To-day at noon there was a great event in the camp; a number of women
and children hoisted the “Vierkleur” [the flag of the Transvaal Republic]
and a white flag also, and went through the camp carrying the flags. [. . .]
   November 1: Betties sickness became intermittent, now better, now
worse. To-day again two bodies were buried. Our minister’s wife went
around the camp to-day to visit the sick.
   November 2: I was very busy tending Bettie’s sickness; three more
buried to-day.
  November 3: Four bodies placed in the earth to-day. Bettie decidedly
better; the doctor came round to visit the sick, he gave Bettie medicine
that did her harm. From then she was so much worse that I was obliged to
give up the doctor’s medicine and to go on with our Boer remedies. Two
more bodies were buried.
  Nov. 4: Bettie seriously ill, and little Martje not well. Now it was very
hard for me; through the night I had to watch by the sick and by day I
could get no rest. Then I proved that the Lord sends strength to carry the
cross that He lays upon us. Every day help came from loving hands. Camp
life claimed so much from us all that it was almost impossible to help one
another. For instance the rations must be fetched, then again the wood. It
was piteous to see aged women struggling even to the point of falling
under the weight of the wood that we had ourselves to bring for our fires.
We did not get enough wood from the Commissariat and so we had to go
into the bush and cut it for ourselves. This all happened by permission of
the Lord for we were being “tried in the fire.” “Whoso endures to the end
shall be saved.” He has promised if the weary and heavy laden come to
Him, they shall find rest; that is our trust in our weariness.
  November 5: People came again to us, for instance old Mr. Potgieter
who helped us much with the sick; the dying trust in him. Again there
were burials, two more of our friends had passed away. [. . .]
  [1 June 1902] After service Ds. Enslin begged the congregation to wait
a little. Commandant Bousefield then came in. He announced to us that
Peace was concluded between the government of England and the two
Republics. That word “Peace” was a blessed one to hear. It was affecting to
see the children how they sprang up clapping their hands and shouting: “It
is Peace!”
   June 2: The Commandant gave order that we should all assemble at the
office at 4 p.m. There he made known to us the fact that our leaders with
their staffs had agreed to lay down their arms. It was now peace. He


                                              Journal of the War      ♦   143
offered us his hand of friendship which Ds. Enslin and a couple of other
men pressed in the name of all the women. The great mass of women
shook their heads in denial and turned back to their rooms. For the fact of
peace we were glad; that was all.

                                                     Translated by Emily Hothouse


      Minnie Martin, MOLIEGE’S VENGEANCE
                          South Africa 1906       English


Despite the fact that it was generally men who first transcribed, translated, and
analyzed orature, white South African women writers have been fascinated by the
genre and its possibilities for literary exploitation. In “Moliege’s Vengeance”
Minnie Martin reworks a Zulu oral narrative. Martin arrived in South Africa in
1891 with her husband, a government official, and settled in Basutoland. In the
dedication prefacing her book Basutoland: Its Legends and Customs (1903), she
writes, “We both liked the country from the first, and I soon became interested in
the people. To enable myself to understand them better, I began to study the lan¬
guage, which I can now speak fairly well.” She also published Tales of the African
Wilds (1935) and The Sun Chief (Legends of Basutoland) (1943), which contains a
slightly revised version of “Moliege’s Vengeance.”
   Writing for an adult audience in The South African Magazine in the early twen¬
tieth century, Martin presents “Moliege’s Vengeance” in such a way as to raise
questions about white women’s reshaping of black women’s oral tradition. For one
thing, Martin’s story stands out as especially meaningful in the context of the
developing feminism of white South Africa in the early twentieth century. It is
interesting to read “Moliege’s Vengeance” as the means whereby a white woman
chooses to represent women’s rage and revenge through the persona of a black
woman. In her novel From Man to Man, roughly contemporary with this story,
Olive Schreiner used on two occasions the despair, grief, and anger of a black
woman in order, it seems, to work out and support the white female character’s
feelings. Martin’s work then, like Schreiner’s, reveals a significant and problematic
cultural interaction between white and black women.      A
                                                                     Dorothy Driver


                                         ♦

When the Chief, Manoe, became a man he desired a wife who would be
more beautiful than any of the maidens of his own village, so he journeyed
from place to place. “For,” said he, “if I trust this matter to my Councillors,
how shall I know that they have chosen the most beautiful maiden? No, I
will see with my own eyes, and so I shall be satisfied.”
   But Manoe was difficult to please, and as time passed he grew angry and
frowned upon his followers because they could not find a maiden beautiful
enough to be his wife. After many wanderings they arrived at the village of
the old Chief, Letsika, and were told how beautiful and fat was his
youngest daughter.

144   ♦   1900 TO 1919
  “Will not my father bring forth his daughter that my eyes may behold
her?” asked Manoe. Accordingly Moliege was sent for, and her beauty so
pleased the young Chief that arrangements were at once made for the mar¬
riage, and shortly afterwards Manoe and his followers returned to their
own village.
  When all the marriage arrangements were completed Moliege was
escorted by two old women and many of her young companions to the vil¬
lage of Manoe, where a great feast had been prepared. The people sang and
feasted, and for many moons there was rejoicing in the village; but as time
passed and there was no child born to Moliege, the Chief began to look
with displeasure upon his young wife, and to wish that he could find some
way of removing her from his dwelling. His anger and dislike filled with
fear the heart of Moliege, so that she went slowly and sadly to and fro in
the place.
   She became a-weary, heavy of heart, and frightened, for she knew that
Manoe intended to kill her. At last she ran away to the mountains and hid
herself in a cave, where, for many moons, she lived alone. Her food was the
wild roots and berries, and her drink the water from the spring near by.
Often she prayed to the spirits of her fathers to take away the curse which
had been laid upon her.
  One day, as she was making earthen pitchers in which to carry water,
she heard a gentle sound behind her, and, looking round, she saw a dove
sitting upon a rock close by, and holding in its mouth two large seeds.
Again it made the gentle sound which at first had caused her to look at it,
and, stretching out its head, it seemed to be asking her to take what was in
its mouth.
    Wondering greatly at this strange thing, Moliege said to the dove,
“What is it that you want?” “I have come,” replied the dove, dropping the
seeds beside her, “to give you these two seeds. Put one in each of these new
pitchers that you are making, and close the opening securely; then wait
patiently for that which shall happen.”
  The bird flew away, and, taking up the seeds, Moliege did as she had
been told. She then carried the two pitchers carefully back to the cave
where she dwelt, and for nine moons nothing happened. At the end of that
time she noticed that both of the pitchers were beginning to crack, as if
something big inside were trying to burst forth. At length they broke open
altogether, and from out of them rolled two lovely baby girls. How great
then was the joy of Moliege! She called them Takane and Takaka, and hid
them from the sight of men, for by them when they were fully grown she
knew her wrongs would be avenged.
  The children grew in strength and beauty, and were to their mother as
the sun when he ariseth after the dark night is ended. Never did Moliege
allow both her daughters to leave the cave at the same time, nor would she
permit them to speak with any person when they went to carry water from
the spring.

                                            Moliege’s Vengeance      *   145
      One day, as Takane went with her pitcher to fetch the water, ’Nkaota,
the son of the Chief, Manoe, by another wife, met her on his return from
hunting, and wondered greatly where the maiden dwelt; but to his greet¬
ings she gave no answer, nor would she even tell him her name. So, telling
his followers that he would return home shortly and bidding them hasten
back with the wild beasts they had slain, ’Nkaota hid himself behind a rock
and waited for the maiden to pass. He then followed her until he came to
the cave, but when he reached the doorway he saw only an old woman and
two doves, for Moliege had seen him coming, and had changed both her
daughters into doves until the stranger should depart.
  After greeting the old woman, ’Nkaota asked for water to drink, which
she gave him silently. “Ho,” quoth ’Nkaota, “this is not the way to find out
what I want to know.” Aloud he said, “Mother, as I passed the spring
below, I saw a beautiful maiden whom, until to-day, my eyes had never
beheld. She is not of my father’s village, for none of my followers knows
her. Can you tell me who she is?”
  “My son,” replied Moliege, “How should I—a lonely old woman—know
aught of such a matter. Trouble not your mind about the maiden and go in
peace.”
  But ’Nkaota knew in his heart that the maiden had entered the cave, so he
determined to watch for her another day. But he hid from Moliege the
thoughts within him, and returned to his home full of desire for the maiden.
  For some days he waited in vain, but upon the sixth day, as he hid by the
spring, Takane came again to fill her pitcher with water. As she knelt by
the side of the spring, ’Nkaota came from the place where he had hidden
himself, and spoke to the maiden, who, when she saw so brave a youth, felt
her heart swell with joy. Many times they met thus, and at length Takane
confessed to her mother that she loved ’Nkaota, who greatly desired her for
his wife. At first, sore indeed was the heart of Moliege, but the tears and
prayers of her child overcame her anger, and she consented to allow Takane
to become the wife of ’Nkaota if he would promise not to reveal to his
father the name of his wife’s mother or where she clwelt.
   The marriage feast was then prepared, and ’Nkaota returned to his
father’s village, taking with him his bride; but at sunrise the next day he
awoke to find the hut empty save only for a dove, which gazed at him
sadly, and flew out into the air beyond his sight.
   In great grief he hastened to the cave of Moliege, to whom he told the
evil thing which had befallen him.
   Moliege promised to restore his wife to him if he would conduct her to
his father’s hut in the middle of the night.
  That night, when all was still in the village, Moliege and ’Nkaota stole
into the hut of the sleeping chief Long and silently did Moliege gaze at
the sleeping husband from whom she had so long been parted. Then, tak¬
ing a horn in her hand, she advanced upon him. At the same time a white
dove flew down and alighted upon Manoe. “Mother” came the voice of


146    ♦   1900 TO 1919
Takane, “touch not the father of ’Nkaota, lest I, your child, hate you.” The
sound of talking awoke Manoe, and, rising up, he saw the woman he had
treated so cruelly in the years gone by.
   “Moliege, is it indeed you? Can the spirits of my fathers bring back the
dead?”
   But Moliege answered him not, nor would she remain in the hut. Taking
some powder out of the horn she sprinkled it over the dove, which became
again the lively Takane. Then, turning to her husband, she said, “May the
spirits of your fathers take your strength from you, as you took my youth
and gladness from me.” Then taking the remaining powder out of the
horn, she threw it over Manoe, who became as a little helpless child who
cannot walk alone.
   Thus was Moliege revenged upon her husband for the wrong he had
done her.




                 Margarethe von Eckenbrecher,
                   Ominous Weather
                            Namibia 1907      German


Margarethe Hopfer was bom in 1875 in Bernburg, Germany, and trained, unusu¬
ally for the time, as a secondary school teacher. After teaching in Berlin and
England, she married Themistokles von Eckenbrecher and moved with him and
their young son to German South West Africa in 1902. Her husband had served
in the colonial forces as a participant in the Swartbooi campaign of 1898 and had
earned the right to a government farm on special conditions. They took up resi¬
dence in Okombahe on the Omaruru River in central Namibia where they
acquired a farm and traded with the people at nearby Kawab.
   In January 1904 rumors of a general uprising against the Germans had reached
even this very remote area. A few weeks later, as the uprising gathered momentum,
white families were taken to Omaruru. The Herero were very successful in the first
few months of the war, but they were eventually outgunned and defeated by the
Germans. The von Eckenbrechers lost some of their possessions in this uprising
and decided to return to Germany. Six months after their divorce in 1913,
Margarethe von Eckenbrecher came back to South West Africa where she remained
until her death. For much of this time she worked as a teacher in Windhoek.
   In 1907, after her first stay in South West Africa, von Eckenbrecher published
an account of her experiences in Okombahe. The book, entitled Was Africa mir gab
und nahm, Erlebnisse einer Deutschen Unsiedlerfrau in Sudwest Afrika (What Africa
gave me and took from me: The experiences of a German settler woman in
Southwest Africa), was very successful and in 1938 a new edition appeared that
provided a more heroic view of the events of the 1904-1907 German-Herero War.
This book is typical in many ways of German settler literature in that it offers an
insight into how attitudes about race and gender, later viewed as immutable, were
constructed in and through the lived experiences of early settler communities. Von
Eckenbrecher’s writing depicts the ambivalent and often marginalized position

                                                   Ominous Weather         ♦   147
that settler women occupied in relation to the colonizing enterprise. Her writing
and those of other settler writers like Clara Brockman, Maria Karow, and Helene
von Falkenhausen reveal the allure of the social and spatial freedom that suddenly
became available to women in the colony when they took up the masculine duties
of doctor, farmer, and protector of the homestead.
                                                                   Rosa Schneider


                                        ♦


Peaceful Christmas celebrations were followed by a quiet New Year. The
days were hot and sultry, the nights stifling and gloomy. Banks of black
clouds massed together above Okombahe Mountain, which gave the village
its name. Dark and threatening, they seemed to hang heavily on the deso¬
late giant, ready to send down bad weather at any moment. On the horizon,
yellow flashes of lightning shot up like rockets. It was quite unbearable.
  The sultriness in nature seemed to communicate itself to the emotions.
One felt uneasy. Something was different, but what it was one could not
fathom.
  The Hereros who lived half an hour away from Okombahe (Okombahe
in Herero is, “There where the giraffe . .       because the mountain, which
rises above Okombahe village, has the shape of a reclining giraffe), at
Kawab, were very busy. Their local gentry often came to Okombahe to shop
in the various stores—more often than usual. If one showed surprise, the
answer was, “We are afraid the grazing will deteriorate at Kawab. We want
to trek early with the livestock, that’s why we are getting everything ready.”
  They visited us often. We had always been on friendly terms with them
and we were surprised that one day they asked my husband with great
interest when I would be returning to Germany. Themis was taken aback
and replied that I had no such intention. Thereupon Justus Hongera, son
of a local dignitary, said, “Mr.v.E., I am telling you that it will be good if
your wife goes away. She must go soon and stay away for a long time.”
   “Whatever gives you that idea?”                   A
    “I am telling you that it will be good if she goes. Africa is not for her.
It’s a country for men who love war. Rough and wild they must be. You can
stay. The gun and the saddle are for you. But if you love your wife, then
send her away!” Themis was amazed at this talk, and not at all sure what
to make of it.
  On another occasion we were discussing a journey we had been plan¬
ning with the deputy chief, Joshua, when he broke in with, “I have a feel¬
ing that you will not get far. Stay here.”
      “What makes you think that?”
    “You white people shouldn’t think that you are safe here, in the coun¬
try of the black people. R is written up there in the clouds: Our Lord God
will send a terrible war which will devastate the land and kill the whites.”
We regarded these words as boasts and foolish gossip.
  A song by my poetically inclined washerwoman, Emma, made me sit up

148    ♦   1900 TO 1919
and listen, “You poor white people. You will die in this country after all. You
little child, it’s not your fault that you were born here. But you also must
die. I am crying and my son is crying, but there is nothing we can do.”
  “Emma, what are you singing about?”
  “Oh nothing, Madam, I am singing what my silly thoughts tell me. You
should not listen.”
  And yet another occasion: “Madam, do you sleep well?”
  “Yes, thank you, very well.”
   1 m sorry.
   “Why?”
   “It would be better if you did not sleep well. Put some pebbles between
your ribs. You must not sleep deeply.”
  Samuel, Emma’s son, who had accompanied us to Gui-Gams months
before, came onto the veranda one day and stared at me. “Why are you
looking at me like that?”
   “Oh Madam, I am looking at the ones marked by death.” I took note of
this and discussed it with Ertmann and my husband who were getting
ready for a major journey. “Would you not rather stay here?”
   “Heaven forbid, no.”
   “All the same, these things have the ring of hidden warnings. I cannot
interpret them.”
   “Nonsense, the revolt of the Bondelzwarts has shocked people to the
core. As soon as the first reports are out, all will be quiet. They’re a cow¬
ardly bunch.”
   We watched the revolution in the south in a leisurely fashion. People
were used to minor incidents occurring frequently. Even if this thing was
of a more serious nature, it did not affect us in Hereroland. The Bondelz¬
warts, a Hottentot tribe, were on bad terms with the Hereros; the trouble
spot was far away; the governor would surely settle the thing with his usual
leniency. However, that was an illusion. Chief Christians would not be
pacified. He did not want the peace offering of rum and tobacco. Troops
were required. When the more northerly district of Omaruru was stripped
of its military and when Captain Franke, feared by some people and pop¬
ular with others, also made his way to the south, then the old, experienced
Africans looked concerned.
  We were all conscious of the fact that there had been a search for
weapons and ammunition at several large Herero settlements the year
before and that the efforts had been successful. The Hereros, habitually
violent and overbearing, had become even more arrogant. A few behaved
in an insubordinate manner towards us whites. At their settlements, where
one used to receive a friendly welcome, one now got an ice-cold reception.
The possibility of a revolt was in the air. With so few troops in the north,
now seemed to be the most opportune moment in time. If the Hereros
were considering an uprising at all, it had to be soon. We made all sorts of
guesses.

                                                 Ominous Weather        ♦   149
   Even the government received warnings. However, it also took a very
optimistic viewpoint. It was indeed fortunate that the troops designated to
return home had not yet embarked for the voyage when the revolt of the
Bondelzwarts broke out.
  At Omaruru, four men were left behind. That was a small number
indeed. Consequently, the old reserves were asked whether the one or
other of them would volunteer in order to serve as reinforcements for the
few troops. Several settlers, traders and businessmen, who were not too
busy at the time, responded to the call. They had grown old and grey in the
battle against the sun and wind. They had worked extremely hard. Now
that the fatherland was calling, their bit of personal business could take
second place.
   The districts of Karibib and Omaruru had been merged into one. First
Lieutenant Kuhn had to administer both. It was in the nature of things
that very little duty was done at the Omaruru base after the departure of
Captain Franke. The horses were with the field company or at Sorris-
Sorris, the place of death. As soon as the old reserves had been recruited,
a lively, tough tour of duty started which was not easy on them initially.
   At the beginning of January, my husband, together with Ertmann, trav¬
elled to Swakopmund via Spitzkoppies to buy fresh supplies for us. The old
supplies were almost totally used up. I let him go with an easy mind. What
will be will be, we cannot fight our destiny.
   He had been gone half a day, when a messenger from Omaruru appeared
in front of our house, on horseback and dripping with perspiration. He had
to deliver draft papers. All the reserves were being called up. Themis
received the order to go to the military base at Okombahe immediately and
to stay there until further notice. The rider, who was totally exhausted, told
me in the strictest confidence that people were beginning to fear the worst
on account of the Hereros. The chiefs of the different settlements and
many able-bodied men were said to have disappeared. There were rumours
of large gatherings, mysterious messages and lively traffic between all the
settlements.
  I had no choice but to have my husband called back. My most trust¬
worthy messenger reached him and Themis returned by the evening of the
second day. He just had enough time to barricade a window in the bed¬
room and to move some items of furniture, so that I could at least not be
shot from the window while I was asleep. He had to stay at the station day
and night in order to be able to defend it if the need arose.
  I myself, on the other hand, was left to my fate, completely alone in the
house with my small child.
  I was really upset by the harshness of that order. We, the wives of the
settlers, irrespective of our social standing, shared the fate of our husbands
in times of peace. We suffered with them, even hunger and thirst. Like our
husbands, we put all our strength at the service of the colony. Our children
were born under the most difficult conditions. We had to endure more in


150   ♦   1900 TO 1919
the colony than would have been conceivable in Germany—and now, in
the hour of danger, my husband was taken away from me.
  Ten days and ten nights I stayed alone with no one except my nine-year-
old servant Isaac, whom I put up in the kitchen so that someone could at
least hold the child for me once in a while.
   During the day, I had to do all the chores, including my husband’s. At
night I was left to my own devices. Several times my dogs barked fiercely.
I got up thinking that a hyena or some other predator was disturbing the
livestock. Because I saw nothing, I turned back. The next morning Isaac
showed me fresh footprints in the sand round the house and in the garden.
Whether kaffirs or Hereros, they had certainly tried to steal something.
The lambs got lost, a calf disappeared mysteriously. I was powerless. And
my husband was just twenty minutes away and could not help me.
   Nevertheless, things were going to get even worse. At midday on 13
January, two Hereros, whom I knew quite well, arrived with their servants.
They wanted to sell a sheep to me. I noticed that the men, six in all, were
armed. Two carried guns, the servants had knobkerries. Even in times of
peace it happens that one is visited by armed people. But then they lean their
weapons on the outside wall of the house as an indication of their peaceful
intentions. This time, however, they kept holding them in their hands.
   I was not in the mood to buy the sheep. There was no money in the
house and we had run out of suitable articles for exchange long ago. They
asked for two shirts. In order to get rid of the fellows, I agreed. Since I was
completely unsuspecting, I thought no evil when they followed me into the
house. We soon came to an agreement and we talked like always after con¬
cluding even the smallest business deal. The conversation revolved round
the impending revolution.
   Geert Afrika, the oldest of the Hereros, asked me, “Do you think it is
right that the Hereros want to start a war against the whites?” I answered
truthfully that it would be an extremely foolish enterprise in my opinion,
because the white man would win under any conditions whatever.
   “And what do you think will happen?”
   “If you are that imprudent and do start, then a lot of blood will be shed,
you will lose land and livestock, and your lives will be in the hands of the
white man.”
  Then another fellow said, “Oh, don’t you worry. We are the servants of the
white man. The lion who sleeps does not know when danger approaches.”
  Thereupon they all grinned and, at a casually dropped word from Geert
Afrika, two people stood in front of each of the two doors in order to cut
off the exit unobtrusively. All at once I became aware of the danger and the
seriousness of my position.
   Geert Afrika stepped right up close to me, laughing and shouting in my
face, “Now we’ll have the real talk about the war, you’ll see.” My heart was
beating violently. I forced myself to be calm. There was no help at hand, if
I did not help myself. I pulled myself together, “You come to do business


                                                 Ominous Weather        ♦   151
with me and you don’t know how to behave towards a white woman? Make
way, you scoundrel.” I pushed past him and went to the door. There I had
expected resistance. However, both of the fellows were so surprised that
they moved aside without waiting for the push I had intended to give
them. In no time the door flew open towards the outside—I was outside.
   There I was safe. There they could do nothing to me because the place was
crowded with Bergdamaras. They would not have dared to shoot inside either.
A blow of the knobkerrie is silent, however. That was what I had expected.
   I stopped in front of the store. Geert came out grinning. He lifted his
floppy hat, “This time the madam was clever. She was cleverer than we
were. It doesn’t matter. The time is near when she will hear from me again.”
Thus spoken he disappeared with his companions.
  My young servant Isaac, who had been looking after the child, came
running along hurriedly and reported, “I don’t even know what the Hereros
wanted. They came towards me and the child, asking me whether it was a
boy or a girl. When I told them they went away and called to me, laugh¬
ing, ‘You stay here, we’ll come back later.’”
   I was deeply troubled by the boy’s report. They had also wanted to kill
my child. Never in my life have I felt so utterly deserted as I did at that
moment. And yet, I had to be grateful that I had been alone at the time
when the Hereros came. If my husband had been there, they would prob¬
ably have clubbed him to death mercilessly inside the house. With me,
they must have felt uneasy and then had second thoughts about carrying
out their plan. Perhaps they also remembered the numerous meals which
these two in particular had received from me, the many times they were
allowed to grind their corn in my mill, the Sundays when they came to me
so often for advice and medication.
   I was feeling very ill, but I recovered control of myself for the sake of my
child. The responsibility of guarding his life lay in my hands and mine alone.


                                                           Translated by Mara Miller




                      Khami, COURT RECORD
                            Zimbabwe 1908         Shangaani


The district criminal court records, preserved in the National Archives, Harare, are a sig¬
nificant source for women’s experiences in colonial Zimbabwe. Many cases deal directly
with laws on marriage and adultery. There are also numerous rape cases. Others, like
prosecutions under the Witchcraft Suppression Act, do not necessarily involve women.
Nevertheless, women were more often accused of being witches than men. The great
majority of prosecutions for assault and murder also turned around sexual relations.
   With serious cases the district criminal court carried out a preparatory examina¬
tion of witnesses. The reports of that hearing were then sent to the solicitor general,


152   ♦   1900 TO 1919
who determined whether the case should be brought to the High Court. There
were no shorthand writers at district courts and the testimonies translated by a
court interpreter were not recorded verbatim. Nevertheless, as in the case that fol¬
lows, the voice of a woman witness comes clearly through.
   Some brief notes are necessary to set the context. Khami’s evidence in the 1908
Gwanda assault case is the testimony of a heroic thirteen year old. Like so many cases
concerning women, it only came before the court because she was strong enough to
make a complaint. Her story involves two long journeys with Segwalagwala, the man
she refused to accept as a husband. These journeys were made in order to have the
marriage registered before the Gwanda district commissioner. Under colonial legisla¬
tion, marriages had to be registered, the consent of the woman had to be given, and
evidence offered that bride-wealth had been paid. As can be seen from Khami’s story,
the system did not offer much protection to a girl being forced into marriage, though
in the end she managed to get her case brought before the criminal court.
   The problem with criminal court records as evidence is that there is no way of
telling what happened next. So we do not know whether Khami went on to marry
a man of her own choice.
                                                                       Terence Ranger


                                          ♦

Rex versus Segwalagwala, charged with rape
Preliminary Examination held at Gwanda on 29 October 1908 before C.
M. Fletcher, with a Shangaan interpreter, the accused being Shangaan.
Evidence of Khami, 23 November 1908
I am a Shangaan woman. I live at Segwalagwala’s kraal. About nine months
ago I remember accused arriving at the kraal. Accused met my father and
said he and my father had been called to the Native Commissioner. Accused
wanted to marry me and my father agreed but I was unwilling. My father at
first refused as the full lobola had not been paid. Accused then assaulted my
father, throwing him down. My father agreed to give me up but wanted the
lobola. £21 was paid but that was not the full amount. When the assault
took place I ran away into the veldt, staying away 4 days. I eventually came
back. Then my father told me I was to go to accused. I was then taken to
him by my brother. We were all afraid of accused.
  I was then left with accused who beat me because I refused to sleep with
him. During the night I again ran away and was found by my uncle,
Mogwana. I was again taken back to accused who said: “Why do you bring
her here? She will only run away again.” I again ran away and was sent
back. I would not go to accused.
   I was then made to sleep with accused by him. He took me into his hut by
force, putting his hand over my mouth. I cried out but accused had connec¬
tion with me against my will, holding me down. I said I was too young.
Accused effected his purpose. Penetration was complete. Makolo came when
I cried out. He was living at accused’s kraal. He did not say anything.
   The next day I left for the Native Commissioner’s. Accused, Ngatzane
and Mvuli came along as well. Along the road accused again had connection

                                                           Court Record        ♦   153
with me by force. He threw me down. This happened five times. He effected
his purpose each time. We were nine days on the road. Each night I was in
accused’s scherm. On each occasion he took me to his scherm. I did not cry
out but said to accused he had no right. We eventually got to the Native
Commissioner’s but as he was away we went to the Blanket Mine first.
While at the Blanket Mine accused again had connection with me, catching
hold of me by the throat. (Nail marks are shown on witness’ throat.) I
refused to have anything to do with him.


27 November 1908
When I was on my way in to report to the Native Commissioner and have the
marriage settled accused threatened me with an assegai he had. He said he
wanted to have intercourse with me and also said that unless I married him he
would use the assegai. When I came in to the Native Commissioner and was
asked whether I would marry accused I refused. Later on I again was ques¬
tioned and again refused. This was when I had come back from the Blanket
Mine. The Native Commissioner then said I was to go back to my kraal and
that accused was to have nothing to do with me. Instructions were that I was
to go back with my brother and I was handed over to him. I heard the instruc¬
tions to the accused given by the Native Commissioner and accused replied
that he would commit suicide for [me] as [I] was his wife and that he would
poison [me].
  I have never agreed to become accused’s wife. Everything he has done
has been by threats. Accused on the way home said he again wanted con¬
nection with me. I replied “Have you not heard the Native Commissioner’s
instructions?” After we left Gwanda accused took me from my brother
close to our kraal and took me to his kraal and again had connection with
me. I had to stay with him 2 days and then ran away again to my father’s
kraal but he had left for another kraal as accused had threatened him; he
was afraid. Later on I again saw accused and he said we should go to the
Native Commissioner’s again. My father was asked to come in but said as
he had been hurt by accused he could not. My brother and uncle accom¬
panied me and appeared before the Native Commissioner. On the road up
accused again forced me to have connection with him on several occasions
and threatened me with an assegai.
   We appeared before the Native Commissioner a second time and I again
refused to marry accused.
  My age is about 13 years. The lobola accused paid my father for me was paid
about 2 years ago. Since I was handed over to accused by my father I have been
living with accused but have never agreed. He has another wife at his kraal.


She made her mark on the record before two witnesses.


                                          Transcriber and translator unknown




154   ♦   1900 TO 1919
                  Indian Womens Association,
                    Women’s Petition:
                  Domestic Unhappiness
                          South Africa 1908      English


One of the first known published examples of Indian women’s writings in South
Africa was a collaborative one, in which women responded to anti-Indian legisla¬
tion. Act 17 of 1895 required that all indentured Indians who had completed their
original contracts with their employers and were not returning to India or being
reindentured in Natal, pay three pounds annually for a residence license. The law
served either to enforce repatriation or prolong indentured labor, as the tax was
beyond the means of the average formerly indentured Indian.
   The Indian Opinion, founded by Mohandas Gandhi in 1904 in South Africa,
and other Indian newspapers published letters of protest. Formed in 1908 with
Gandhi’s assistance, the Indian Women’s Association added its voice to protests by
publishing several petitions in The African Chronicle. The act was repealed in 1913
as a direct result of the massive passive resistance campaign that was mounted
against it.
   The Indian Women’s Association, which became known as the Durban Indian
Women’s Association under the leadership of Kunwarani Lady Maharaj Singh,
wife of the agent-general of India in 1927, continues to exist to this day, as the
Durban Women’s Association. It provided an initial platform for activist Indian
women to participate in broader nonracial formations in the decades that followed.
In 1952, when Africans and Indians organized the fourth Passive Resistance
Campaign, a multiracial Conference of Women was held in Johannesburg. This
culminated in the historic march by South African women of all race groups on the
Union Buildings in Pretoria, on 9 August 1956.
  On 19 September 1908, The African Chronicle published the petition of the
Indian Women’s Association, without the signatories’ names.
                                                       Devarakshanam Govinden


                                         ♦


To the Honourable the Speaker and the Honourable Members of the
Legislative Assembly of the Colony of Natal.
This petition of the Indian Women’s Association.
Humbly Sheweth:

  1. That your petitioners beg leave to make representation on behalf of a
    class of Indians introduced into this Colony under indenture, and who
    labour under great disabilities and grievances owing to strict enforce¬
    ment of Act 17 of 1895. The severity and hardship arising therefrom
    have impelled your petitioners’ Association, to espouse their cause
     owing to the serious nature of their case.
  2. Your petitioners respectfully submit that the Indians affected by the
    aforesaid Act, irrespective of sex, are subjected to an Annual imposi-


                        Women’s Petition: Domestic Unhappiness              ♦   155
      tion of £3, which sum owing to their helpless and indigent state, they
    are virtually unable to pay.
 3. Owing to indiscreet enforcement of the aforesaid Act, great hardship
    and considerable suffering are inflicted upon them.
 4. Your petitioners’ Association in their endeavour to ameliorate and ele¬
      vate the condition of their sex, have been informed of startling revela¬
      tion of misery and serious annoyance which have resulted from the
      severe enforcement of this aforesaid Act that your petitioners deemed
      it their duty to bring the unfortunate and unhappy state of existence to
    the notice of this Honourable Assembly.
 5. In normal times of prosperity, common labourers such as the Indians
      are, must feel heavily the strain of an imposition of kind of—£3—(for
      the privilege of living in this Colony) and much keener the bitterness
      of feeling must be, which no doubt at present exists, owing to chronic
      depression that prevails in all branches of trade in this Colony, from
    which the Indians are specially suffering.
 6. Whilst the sterner sex—men—keenly feel and resent the severity of
      this Act, the woman-folk, weak and gentle by nature, who come under
      the category of the aforesaid Act, must naturally feel the stringency of
      this measure more acutely.
 7. Your petitioners beg to draw the attention of this Honourable House
      to the tendency of the aforesaid Act, on women and girls, who are
      liable to pay this £3, which is not calculated to afford protection to the
      inherent rights of the gentler sex, for it fosters domestic infelicity.
 8. Your petitioners regard with great shame and sorrow, that women who
      are in default of payment are sentenced to imprisonment; and the very
      dread of being marched up to Court and gaol is enough to numb their
      intellect and cause terror, to escape from which, the aforesaid Act fos¬
      ters in them a temptation to barter their female modesty and virtue.
 9. The aforesaid Act has been a source of breaking up many a home,
      alienating the affection of husband and wife, besides separating child
      from mother.
10. There is no precedent in the legislation of any other country under the
      British Flag, where women are taxed for the privilege of living with
      their husbands or under the protection of their nature guardians.


  Wherefore your petitioners          humbly pray, that this        Honourable
House will be pleased to repeal the aforesaid Act 17 of 1895 or to grant
such other relief as it may deem fit.
  For this act of justice, your petitioners will ever pray.




156    ♦   1900 TO 1919
      Kandjendes Sister, LETTER FROM KARIBIB
                            Namibia 1909       otjiHerero


Josephat Kandjendes sister wrote this letter after one of the most brutal suppressions
of resistance in Namibia’s colonial history. The Herero War began in January 1904
under the leadership of Samuel Maherero. In the first eight months of the war the
Herero regained control of much of central Namibia. To counter this the German
colonial administration sent reinforcements into battle under the command of
General Lothar von Trotha. The Herero were defeated at the disastrous battle of
Hamakari, after which von Trotha issued his notorious Extermination Order:


   All Herero must leave the country. If they do not, I will force them with can¬
   nons to do so. Within the German borders, every Herero, with or without
   weapons, with or without cattle, will be shot. I no longer shelter women and
   children. They must either return to their people or they will be shot at. This
   is my message to the Herero people.


   The policy outlined in the Extermination Order was pursued up until about
November 1904. However, evidence suggests that the order, made in early Octo¬
ber, merely formalized existing practice. By the time an armistice was signed in
December 1905, between 75 and 80 percent of the Herero had perished. Those
who survived were subject to repressive conditions in prisoner-of-war camps.
Families were split up; men, women, and children were forced to work in condi¬
tions of virtual slavery. These camps were not closed until April 1908.
   During this period, therefore, travel, and thus communication among surviving
members of traumatized families, was very difficult without a pass, which had to
be carried by anyone, male or female, over the age of eight. If one were caught
without a pass, the penalties were severe. Although the writer of this letter remains
anonymous, the author’s voice evokes anguish, fear, and strength, despite the hos¬
tile mediation of the “translators” of this intercepted letter. The letter survived
alongside other letters, translated from otjiHerero into German, in the records of
communication between the imperial district commissioner in Swakopmund and
the imperial German government. The author’s passionate exhortation that her
brother destroy his papers provides an insight into the danger faced by an
oppressed people when recording their history.
                                                                       Margie Orford


                                          ♦

The Imperial District Commissioner
Swakopmund 23 February 1909
Top Secret
Re: Ordinance of 20 January 1909, no. 1718
In total, about 25 letters of natives have been intercepted, opened, inspected,
carefully closed again and despatched to the addressees, so that the latter
could not learn about the interception. The interception has not yielded clues
about any current movement among the natives. Only the enclosed letter to


                                                   Letter from Karibib         ♦   157
the Herero Josaphet Kandjende appeared to be of significance. Even before
the letter reached the addressee, his home was searched for suspicious letters,
but only completely harmless papers have been found.
   Signed, Schenke


To the Imperial Government
Copy. Top Secret
Karibib, to Josephat Kanjende, 1909
My beloved brother! I greet you heartily and let you know, that I am still
well. Rudolphine Kanjende intends to come, but her pass has been taken
away, because you have not got her a pass from your master and from the
police in Swakopmund. Therefore Rudolphine can now do nothing, she is
with her relative, and to leave him here is difficult too. Please do make
some effort these days to get money for two people. You know I am a weak
woman, I cannot transport the people.
  From you we have heard, that you have been in jail, it is enough to drive
one mad! I tell you this: do not have any papers in your box, if you have any,
throw them away, burn them. For a black man there are no papers anymore
in our country now. If you have sense, you will take sense from this letter.
  Do not write me again that I should take a letter (of dismissal) from my
master. And I tell you nothing for certain, you must know for yourself. For
the Herero have died, and the enemy kills whoever he finds.
   Enough. Keep this first and last letter coming from this place. I posted
it with my master, because no black man is going this way.
   If you are asleep, open your eyes so they are vigilant, and pray. Greetings
to all my relatives. I have no one who judges but God.
   Enough. I close with greetings.
                                                                   (no signature)


                                                Translated by Werner Hillebrecht




           Native and Coloured Women of
       the Province of the Orange Free State
   Petition of the Native and Coloured
                                                                      ,
         Women of the Province of
           the Orange Free State
                         South Africa 1912      English


In 1893, with the passage df Law 8.2 in the Orange Free State (OFS), women were
included under influx control regulations that previously and elsewhere had applied
only to African men. At this time, only the OFS extended influx control legislation
to women. The extension of a pass law to women would mean that those hoping to


158   ♦   1900 TO 1919
remain in urban areas would be allowed to do so only if they took up paid domes¬
tic labor. Besides this coercion, the police examination of passes put them at risk of
being harassed and raped, their homes ransacked, and their families separated. For
the local authorities, on the other hand, enforcing and issuing the passes repre¬
sented a lucrative form of income and a sign of their power.
     By 11 March 1912, a petition had been drafted by the newly formed Native and
Coloured Women’s Association, signed by five thousand women and circulated
around the towns and villages of the OFS. On 3 April 1912 the petition—
addressed to Prime Minister Louis Botha—was handed to the minister of finance,
Henry Burton, in Cape Town by a delegation of ethnically mixed black women
across various social classes, a remarkable accomplishment. Their assumption of
rights as women and mothers, and their evocation of the principles of justice, lend
their petition particular authority.
     In 1913 the enforcement of the pass laws became increasingly stringent. On 28 May
a women’s meeting in Waaihoek resolved to embark on a mass resistance campaign,
pledging not to carry passes until the achievement of the goals voiced in this petition.
On 29 May, eighty women were arrested for burning their passes and offering them¬
selves up for arrest. The next day, six hundred women appeared at the court house in
solidarity with those arrested, shouting, “We have done with the pleading, we now
demand.” These words spread from Waaihoek to Senekal, Winburg, and Jagers-
fontein, and launched a spontaneous passive resistance campaign throughout the
OFS. Refusing to carry passes, the women offered themselves up for arrest at local
police stations; ignoring the fine options, they hoped to fill the jails.
                                                                     Rirhandzu Mageza


                                           ♦

11th March, 1912
To The Right Honourable General Louis Botha, P.C., M.L.A., Prime Minister
of the Union of South Africa, CAPE TOWN.
Sir,
   The petition of the undersigned humbly showeth:—

1.    That your petitioners are residents of the various towns and villages in
      the Province of the Orange Free State, and are subjects of His Gracious
      Majesty King George V.
2.    That your petitioners, as inhabitants of the said Province, are under a
      burden of having to carry Residential Passes in terms of Section 2 of
      Law 8 of 1893 (Orange Free State Statutes).
3.    That this law is a source of grievance to your petitioners in that:—


         (a)   It renders them liable to interference by any policeman at any
               time, and in that way deprives them of that liberty enjoyed by
               their women-folk in other Provinces.
         (b)   It does not afford them that protection which may, peradven-
               ture, have been contemplated by the legislators, but on the other
               hand it subjects them to taxation, notwithstanding the sex to


                      Petition of the Native and Coloured Women                 ♦   159
               which they belong—a policy which was unknown in the late
               South African Republic, and is unknown in the history of British
               Rule.
        (c)    It has a barbarous tendency of ignoring the consequences of
               marriage in respect of natives, especially the right of parents
               to control their children, a right which parents ought to exercise
               without interference from outside; and the effect of its opera¬
               tion upon the minds of our children is that it inculcates upon
               them the idea that as soon as they become liable to comply with
               the requirements of this law, their age of majority also com¬
               mences, and can, therefore, act independently of their parents.
        (d)    It is an effective means of enforcing labour, and as such, cannot
               have any justification whatever on the ground of necessity or
               expediency.
        (e)    It lowers the dignity of women and throws to pieces every ele¬
               ment of respect to which they are entitled; and for this reason it
               has no claim to recognition as a just, progressive and protective
               law, necessary for their elevation in the scale of civilisation;
               moreover it does not improve their social status.
        (f)    It can only have one ground for its existence in that Statute
               Book—namely, that it is a most effective weapon the governing
               powers could resort to to make the natives and coloured women
               in the Province of the Orange Free State ever feel their inferi¬
               ority, which is only another way of perpetuating oppression
               regardless of the feelings of those who are governed; whereas
            the essence of justice is “Do unto others as you would be done by.”
4.    That your petitioners are the only women in the whole of the Union
      who are subjected to such an oppressive law; the women in the other
      provinces are not subjected to any Pass Laws.
5.    That representations were made to the Imperial Government about
      this matter by the Congress of the Orange Fnee State Native Associ¬
      ation, and the Imperial Government replied that the matter was a local
      one in which they could not interfere, but expressed a hope that the
      local authorities would find their way to grant your petitioners relief,
      and further that your petitioners would be better off under the Union
      Government of South Africa.
6.    That further representations were made to the late Government of the
      Orange River Colony, the Conference of the Municipal Associations of
      the Orange River Colony, and to the Town Council of Bloemfontein,
      and all these bodies have referred the said Congress of the Orange Free
      State Native Association to the Union Parliament.
        Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Right Honourable
      the Prime Minister may be pleased:—
        1.     To grant them immediate relief from this burdensome law by
               introducing a Bill in Parliament repealing it.


160    ♦     1900 TO 1919
or      2.   If it be not within the province of the Right Honourable the
             Prime Minister to do so, then, the Minister responsible be
             charged with the introduction of this Bill by the Right Honour¬
             able the Prime Minister.
or      3.   To grant your petitioners immediate relief from the operation of
             this law by suspending it, in so far as they are concerned, pending
             the introduction of this Bill into Parliament by the Minister
             responsible.


and your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.




                    Adelaide Charles Dube,
                  Africa: My Native Land
                           South Africa 1913       English


Adelaide Dube’s “Africa: My Native Land” is the earliest example of a published
poem written by a black South African woman. The poem initially appeared and
has frequently been anthologized simply under the signature “Mrs. A. C. Dube,”
without accompanying information given on the author. Adelaide Tantsi was born
at Engcobo in the Eastern Cape, the daughter of J. Z. Tantsi, founder of the
Ethiopian church in South Africa. She studied first at Inanda Seminary in the late
1890s and then—like Charlotte Maxeke (see her text in this volume)—at Wilber-
force Institute in Ohio from 1901 to 1904, graduating with a B.Sc. After her
return to South Africa, she founded and taught at an American mission school in
Klipspruit, in an area that would later become part of Soweto. She married Charles
Dube, the younger son of John Dube (the founder and proprietor of Ilanga Lase
Natali, the Zulu weekly in which this poem first appeared). She took on the name
Charles as her second name, according to custom, and settled with him at
Ohlange, where they both taught for many years. She died on 11 August 1933.
     The poem reprinted below was published on 31 October 1913, the day the Zulu
king Dinizulu was buried and in the year of the Natives’ Land Act, which forced
thousands of black South African farmers and their families off their land into
reserves. The poem celebrates Africa and laments its lost freedom. But like much
South African writing at that time, notably that of another Zulu poet writing in
English, H. I. E. Dhlomo, it is indebted to an English poetic lexicon and tradition.
Nonetheless, the reference to “my troubled bones” marks allegiance to an ancestral
religion, alluding to the importance of burial on one’s home ground and to the rup¬
ture between the ancestors and their offspring through the alienation of the land.
The temporal reference—kingdoms rise and fall, and so will the British empire—
connects with the temporality of “troubled bones,” bones that are not now at peace
but will be; indeed, there is a threat in these rattling bones and in the insistence on
an unending struggle (“never, never”), a struggle until death and beyond. The sac¬
rificial blood shed in battle has a Christian resonance (“blood was shed to save
thee”), but the Christianity preached by nineteenth-century missionaries is ques¬
tioned from the perspective of the enslaved, who know that what has been taken

                                               Africa: My Native Land          ♦   161
from them by the colonizers is, according to the gospel of the missionaries, “free¬
dom—God’s great gift.”                                                  .
  Interesting, too, is the conflation of masculine and feminine perspectives, and
the absorption of a woman’s voice and a woman’s aspirations and experience into
the heroic tradition. Here is a crucial source for the refusal of some black South
African women to identify with a European feminist tradition: There is another
battle first to be won.
                                     Dorothy Driver and Esther Sbongi/e Sangweni


                                        ♦

   How beautiful are thy hills and thy dales!
   I love thy very atmosphere so sweet,
   Thy trees adorn the landscape rough and steep
   No other country in the whole world
       could with thee compare.


   It is here where our noble ancestors,
   Experienced joy’s of dear ones and of home;
   Where great and glorious kingdoms rose and fell
   Where blood was shed to save thee, thou
       dearest Land ever known;

    But, Alas! their efforts, were all in vain,
    For to-day others claim thee as their own;
    No longer can their off-spring cherish thee
    No land to call their own—but outcasts
       in their own country!


    Despair of thee I never, never will,
    Struggle I must for freedom—God’s great gift
    Till every drop of blood within my veins                f
    Shall dry upon my troubled bones, oh
       thou Dearest Native Land!




                  Louisa Mvemve,
        A “Little Woman’s” Advice to the
                      Public
                           South Africa 1916      English


 Louisa Mvemve worked from 1915 to 1930 as an ixhwele (herbalist) in the Eastern
 Cape and then in Brakpan, east of Johannesburg. The 1916 pamphlet partly repro¬
 duced here is one of several that she herself published, which are all now housed


 162   ♦   1900 TO 1919
in the Pretoria Central State Archive. Besides its advice, Mvemve’s pamphlet con¬
tains an autobiographical fragment that recounts her move from her rural, peasant
origins to the city where she became a landowner, trader, and herbalist, consulted
by white as well as black people.
   Mvemve was born near Port Alfred in the Eastern Cape toward the end of the
nineteenth century. Born umntwana wesingxhobo (with a caul) she was marked as
having special powers. She did not have a mission-school education—the usual
means of entry into the country’s small black elite—nor did she enjoy the patron¬
age of a powerful person, but she was ambitious and enterprising enough to build
her own successful business as an herbalist.
   In all her work, Mvemve stressed that her powers as midwife, healer, herbalist,
and diagnostician came from traditional Xhosa practices, particularly from the
nursing skills of her maternal grandmother and the medical knowledge of her
maternal grandfather. On the other hand, she was also keen to have Western sci¬
ence confirm the efficacy of her cures so that she could patent them and be
licensed to practice. She was, however, up against a growing body of legislation
that sought to regulate medical work by those “nonqualified.” She was also affected
by the increasingly rigid division of towns along racial lines, which eventually
forced her to abandon the large herbarium she had established in a part of Brakpan
newly zoned for whites. In these ways, Mvemve lived through a peculiarly South
African series of tensions between tradition and modernity.
   Through all her endeavors and all her trials, Mvemve’s humor, tenacity, and
confidence remained high. She frequently employed scribes to assist her in her
business and legal campaigns, and she is known to us today because she compre¬
hended the power of the written word to present her skills to others and to defend
her when these skills were undervalued or resisted.
                                                                   Catherine Burns


                                         ♦

A “Little Woman’s” Advice to the Woman Who Has No Family
But Wants Children.
Many women cannot get children. Others have them before they are due
and lose them from 3 to 8 months old; this is unhealthy for the woman and
will eventually kill her unless she follows “The Little Woman’s Advice.”
Take the special herb for this irregularity and the child will not be born
before it is the right time (nine months); and the child will be healthy and
grow big and strong. The herb is good in all cases of child-bearing. It
seems hard to believe what I shall tell you now, but it is quite true:
   When my mother got married to my father she had only 2 children; after
which she had several miscarriages. She didn’t know what to do and tried
all sorts of medicines without effect. Then my father said: “If you cannot
carry a child until the proper time comes you will have to go back to your
father; it is not you that I want but a family.” She was then bearing another
child. She went back to her father and told him what my father had said;
then my grandfather said: “I am sorry that you did not send for me when
you first felt the pains; I would have helped you to stop the child coming


                         A “Little Woman’s” Advice to the Public            ♦   163
too soon; come and I will show you something that will prevent the child
coming too soon.” When they came to the forest he showed her the root
and said: “Take this root when you get home, boil it and drink it, then take
the bark away from the root, twist it into a rope, make a knot in the mid
die of the rope, and put it around your hips; that will stop the child from
coming too soon, but always drink the water in which you boil the root.
  She did as he had told her and the pain went away. Then she said: “What
am I to do now, father?” He said: “Go back to your husband and keep on
drinking the herb and wear the rope around your hips and the child won’t
be born until the proper time, and then you will have a line strong child.
She did not have any more miscarriages. The treatment stopped the trou¬
ble; the child came duly covered with a skin (caul) so she sent lor her lather
and said I didn’t have the child. Then her father said the child was only cov¬
ered with a skin and prophesised that she would be a wise and strong child
and would know all his secrets. Then he said to his daughter:        You will
always have children now and no more miscarriages.” And his words were
true; I am that child and I am strong to-day, alive, well and strong.
   These herbs were all my grandfather’s secrets. They will cure all manner
of diseases.

The “Little Woman’s” Advice to Men Suffering from Diseases
Caused by Associating with Bad Women.
No man need suffer from the bad effects of associating with immoral
women, for there is a certain herb which will remove the poison from the
blood and will kill the germs. It removes the pimples which form in the
water passage, and will cure the ill-effects of strain; it will even cure the
worst form of syphilis. “The Little Woman will cure this disease and make
the man well and strong again. Take her medicine and dont drink any
other drink; avoid meat and vegetables; live on porridge without milk. You
will soon be quite cured and the sores will be healed. Take sour milk with
ground bread-crust twice a month; a tablespoon of it cures any blood poi¬
son; even if it is poison that has been given to you in food, tea or coffee.
Many people lose their lives through blood poisoning.
  Don’t cut yourself, but paint yourself with the special powder; take the
 medicine lukewarm. Those people who take this medicine will never suf¬
 fer. Every night and morning you must paint yourself. Keep away from
women (or if a woman—keep away from men).


 Nervousness
 Many men and women become restless through having been suddenly
 frightened by such causes as lightening. This nervous condition can be
 quite cured by a course of treatment with bread crust and sour milk; and
 the special herbal mixture for nervousness.
    Take no food for a day, and then take a dose of the ground bread crumbs,
 as recommended for some of the other complaints; after that starve yourself


 164   ♦   1900 TO 1919
for a week, then take porridge only and the special nerve mixture as hot as
you can drink it. The mixture will also remove worms from the stomach.
After a short course of the treatment you will become as strong and brave
as a lion. It is equally good lor men and women.


The “Little Woman’s” Advice for Delicate Children and Those
Who Are Delicate and Weedy
If your child is delicate give it no food but the juice of a vegetable with
which I shall supply you. Boil the vegetable for 3 hours, strain out the juice
and feed the child with this before you give it any other food.
  There is no need to nurse the child or feed it from the breast. The child
will grow strong and quickly and will be tree from wind on the stomach
and other childish illnesses. Of course, many mothers are not in good
health and are often peevish tempered; the milk of such mothers is very
harmful to their children and is the cause of many of their disorders.




            Sara van Wijk, BASTER AFFIDAVIT
                           Namibia 1918      Afrikaans


In 1885 an agreement was reached between the Germans, who were then estab¬
lishing control over Namibia, and the Basters, who lived in the area around
Rehoboth. The Germans were to maintain their friendship toward and protection
of the Basters, who for their part would offer the Germans no resistance. During
the political upheavals of 1893 and 1894 when the invading German troops fought
against Hendrik Witbooi, leader of the Oorlams, and during the German-Herero
War of 1904-1907, the Basters sided firmly with the Germans.
   This alliance continued until August 1914, despite minor differences between
the two parties. “Basterkorps” were used for a while by the Germans to assist
them during skirmishes with other indigenous Namibian groups, though in gen¬
eral, the agreement held that the Basterskorps were to provide military assistance
in the Rehoboth district only. While the Basterkorps used their own weapons,
those who possessed none were given German weapons as well as German mili¬
tary uniforms. Some Basters complained to the Germans not only about these
matters, but also because members of the Basterkorps were sent to Kraaipoort and
Nauchas outside the Rehoboth district to fight. The Basters saw this as a breach
of their agreement and, in reprisal, began to rob and kill German families, thus
putting an end to friendly relations. The Germans determined to take revenge on
the Basters.
   The affidavit describes events in 1915, just prior to the invasion of Namibia by
South African troops. This affidavit, and others like it, were taken by South
African officers after they had established control on 12 May 1915.
                                                                      Pam Claassen


                                        ♦


                                                     Baster Affidavit      ♦   165
Katrina Fredrika Sara van Wijk, duly sworn, states:
     I was born in 1861, in the District Amandelboom, Cape Colony. I am
daughter of Jan van Wijk, and wife of Cornelius van Wijk, the first wit
ness.
   My husband went in March 1915 to Swakopmund. He returned towards
the end of April to his farm, Garies. On the return of my husband, there
were reports that things were going wrong, and that the Germans were
hostile towards our people. After we heard what had taken place at Heuras,
my husband sent us away from our home into the mountains. The moun¬
tains run almost up to our house. I took my five children with me. The
names of the children are:—
1.    Anna, 23 years old.
2.    Cornelia, 20 years old.
3.    Hermanus, 18 years old.
4.    Christina, 15 years old.
5.    Johannes, 12 years old.


     With us also went the wife of Frederick van Wijk and the wife of Stoffel
van Wijk with their children. We went with two wagons and camped some
little distance from our house. On the 4th May the Germans came upon
us. My husband was not then with us; he was at the house. Someone must
have told the Germans of our whereabouts in the mountains, otherwise
they could not have known of us there. It was still early in the morning
when they came. We had no able-bodied man with us, neither a rifle. A
few days earlier we had a shotgun with which we shot partridges, but this
had been taken back to our house.
     The Germans were evidently in the mountains to look for us. When we
first became aware of them, two armed soldiers were standing in front of
us. We were all lying under a krantz. One of the soldiers then said to us: “I
will shoot every one of you dead this morning.” On saying this he pointed
his rifle at the wife of Stoffel van Wijk. She called out: “Oh!   please I am
an old woman!” Immediately thereupon he, however, shot her through the
breast. She died immediately. She is old and must have been about seventy
years. The same soldier thereafter fired on the little boy of Frederick van
Wijk, four years and a few months old. This child had part of his skull shot
away and also died immediately. The others of us begged for mercy. The
same soldier then fired upon the little son of Stoffel van Wijk. He is eleven
years old and was wounded in the head. He is well again to-day. The sol¬
diers then ordered us to get up. We got up, and the same soldier then fired
 two shots at my son Hermanus, but missed him. He then shot dead my
 other son Johannes. Thereafter they drove us in front of them to the farm.
The dead were left unburied there. My daughter Anna then attempted to
 escape, and then one of another batch of four Germans, who came from
 another direction, fired at her and killed her. They jeered at us and said:
 “Where are your English now, that they don’t come and help you?” We


 166    ♦   1900 TO 1919
were kept there at the trees for several hours. The soldiers wished to know
where my husband was. They were determined to capture him. I said: “My
husband remained behind at the house, but has probably now fled after all
this firing.” That afternoon they again drove us on in front of them. When
we came near the water, Ober Polizei Wachtmeister Dietrichs of Rehoboth,
and Sergeant Kuhn, formerly ol the police at Bulspoort, Bezirk Rehoboth,
came up to us and kept my son Hermanus behind. He only was kept
behind. All the others were driven forward. These two soldiers then took
my son round a krantz, and a few minutes later I heard what appeared to
be a very loud rifle shot. When I heard the shot I knew that it was fired at
my son. They did not tell me that they had shot him, and I never saw him
alive again. That night they put us on a wagon and took us away. Two days
later I asked Dietrichs: “What did you do with my son the day before yes¬
terday? How is it that I do not see him any longer?” His reply was: “I have
ordered him to drive on cattle.” They took us with them as far as Leutwein
Station, not far from Windhuk, where they released us on the 13th May.
After they had released us we returned on foot to Garies. On the 19th May
I met my husband at Kubis. I told my husband about Hermanus and that
I thought that he had been shot. I also told him where the spot was. My
daughter Cornelia and I then went with my husband to the place men¬
tioned by me. There we found the unburied body of my son Hermanus. He
was lying exactly where I had heard the loud shot fired. A handkerchief
was still tied over his eyes. Four cartridge cases were lying close to him. He
lay on his back with his head slanting downward. I did not wish to go any
nearer and cannot therefore give further details. That same day he was
buried.
  I do not know the soldier who murdered the wife of Stoffel van Wijk
and the others on the mountain. The Wachtmeister Dietrichs and the
Sergeant Kuhn I, however, know well.
                                                               Sara van Wijk


                                          Transcriber and translator unknown




                                                  Baster Affidavit     ♦   167
1920s to 1950s
    A




*
          Queen Regent Labotsibeni
 Address to the Resident Commissioner
                               Swaziland 1921        siSwati


Queen Regent Labotsibeni, wife of Mbandzeni, was born in 1858. She became the queen
regent in 1900 in order to supervise the young King Sobhuza II. During her regency she
fought the British over land and established a financial system that still stands in order to
buy back the land. To educate her grandson and his advisers, she established the
Zombodze National School, the foundation of Swaziland’s modern school system.
   On 22 December 1921 Queen Regent Labotsibeni transferred all her political
power to her grandson, Sobhuza II. He inherited two positions: paramount chief of
Swaziland in the context of the British colonial structure and king of the Swazi
nation. His was a royal succession, and the transition needed to ensure continuity
in the indigenous institutions of governance and the struggle to shape the identity
of Swaziland as an African nation.
   Queen Regent Labotsibeni had carefully crafted this subtle and complex sociopo¬
litical process. In her eloquent proclamation of the transition, she emphasized
human character and ingenuity as critical ingredients in building a nation and its
leadership. She pointed out that over a period of thirty-two years, from the death of
Sobhuza’s grandfather (her husband) in 1889 to the enthronement of her grandson
in December 1921, she experienced as “a woman” the “deepest emotions.” As “grand¬
mother and Queen,” she had brought up Sobhuza as a “Swazi prince” whose spirit
was in total “accord with the traditions and the feelings and the aspirations of his
countrymen.” She emphasized that in carrying out this singular duty, she did so with
“clean hands”—without selling a “single right” or land that belongs to the Swazi
nation. Few African leaders could say this at the end of the twentieth century.
   In singling out her status as a woman, she both reminds Swazi patriarchy of that
status and challenges scholars looking for radical female voices. She fought against
new forms of domination and social injustice in the form of neocolonialism, struc¬
tural adjustment programs, and corruption. The speech also testifies to women’s con¬
tributions despite societies in which gender inequality wastes invaluable resources.
                                                                 Ackson M. Kanduza


                                              ♦


Office of the Swazi Nation, Zombode Royal Kraal, 22nd December, 1921.


His Honour
The Resident Commissioner, for Swaziland.


Honourable Sir,
  This is the day I have always longed for. It has now come at last like a
dream which has come true.


                              Address to the Resident Commissioner                   ♦   171
  King Mband[z]eni died in October 1889, (thirty two years ago). As
from that day my life has been one burdened with an awful responsibility
and anxiety. It has been a life full of the deepest emotions that a woman
has ever had.
   The Swazi Nation placed me in charge of the whole affairs of their
country as Queen, in the place °f their dead King and I have acted as
Regent during the minority of two of their minor kings. Bhunu died after
only a very short life leaving me with the responsibility of bringing up his
infant son and heir. I rejoice that I now present him to ^lour Honour, in
your capacity as head of the Administration of Swaziland. He is yet young
as Your Honour can see. He shall constantly require my advice. I and the
Nation have every confidence in him. I have brought him up as a Swazi
prince should be brought up. His spirit is in entire accord with the tradi¬
tions and the feelings and the aspirations of his countrymen and what is
more I have given him the opportunity to obtain the very best training
which any native youth can obtain here in South Africa. I beg to thank
Your Honour for all the help which you gave me in opening such facilities
for the prince’s education. His going away from me always gave me pain,
which only stopped when I saw him return having grown greater in stature
and in Knowledge. In him I feel that I have done all that as his grand
mother and Queen I could possibly do.
  I have asked Your Honour to come here and bear me witness before him
and the Council of the Nation, to the effect that I have never sold even a
single right of the Nation. I have never given away any of their land or
people to others. I stand before them with clean hands. All my books are
open for his inspection.
  Perhaps Your Honour is asking himself as to what my position is now to
be and what relationship shall exist between the new Paramount Chief and
myself. All this is governed by our ancient customs. I shall reply shortly. He
will lead the Nation and deal with the Administration as King of his people
and I shall remain greater by the influence which my position holds over
him and over the Councils of the Nation. My duties towards him and the
Nation will never cease until death. There is no truth in the fiction that the
old Swazi Queens are always killed or done away with. Look at our history.
They all lived their natural life out except one who was killed through her
own open rebellion.
  In conclusion I desire to introduce to Your Honour, in your capacity as
head of the Swaziland Administration and local chief representative of His
Royal Highness the High Commissioner, this my grand son, SOBHUZA II,
the Paramount Chief of Swaziland and King of the Swazi Nation. In doing
this I commend him to your friendly assistance and help. I cannot give him
 my experience. During my time I have had the friendly help of five noble
 High Commissioners ana that of three honourable Resident Commis¬
 sioners of this country. I thank Your Honour and them all for all the assis¬
 tance which you have always been ready and willing to give me. The


172   ♦   1920s to 1950s
Administration will henceforth address all its communications direct to
him. SOBHUZA II gets his name title and position by the right of inheri¬
tance from his ancient House whose Princes have ruled over the Swazi
Nation from time immemorial. I bid Your Honour farewell.
                               Most faithfully Yours,
                       Queen Regent of the Swazi Nation,
                                     Labotsibeni.
                                     Her X Mark


                                                        Translated by Josiah Vilakati




        Qedabak'wabo Moyo, GOING TO SCHOOL
                             Zimbabwe 1921         English


Qedabakwabo (Qeda) Moyo was a young convert of the Brethren in Christ Church
(BICC), one of several Christian mission societies active in Southern Rhodesia.
The Brethren in Christ missionaries first came to Zimbabwe (Rhodesia) in 1898,
two years after the defeat of the Ndebele state. They were active in the province
known as Matabeleland, where siNdebele remains the dominant language. Mission
societies arriving after 1896 received large tracts of land from the British South
Africa Company (BSAC). Thus the BICC’s first mission farm, Matopo Mission,
was established in 1898 on land made available by the BSAC. Their second mission
farm, purchased from a white settler, opened in 1908 as the Mtshabezi Rescue
Home and School for African Girls. Mtshabezi was Qedabakwabo Moyo’s chief
residence from 1915 to 1921 and perhaps later.
   Moyo appears in the Mtshabezi school attendance records. Church marriage
records also record her marriage in a Christian ceremony at Mtshabezi to Mtshazo
Nkala, a teacher from Matopo, in 1926.
  The article written by Moyo appeared in the Evangelical Visitor (8 August 1921),
a weekly newspaper that circulated among church members in North America and
offered a special section devoted to news from the foreign mission stations. The
BICC had historical links to the Mennonites of Pennsylvania.
  The text featured here is unusual in that it was written by an African convert and
not by one of the missionaries. Only rarely, particularly in the decades preceding
1950, did this occur.
  It is not clear whether Qeda Moyo’s text is a speech that she gave in English on the
last day of school, or whether it was translated by the missionary who submitted it,
Mary E. Heisey. The slight irregularities in English idiom suggest that Moyo spoke in
English. The conversion narrative that Moyo offers follows the BICC teaching (as
influenced by Wesleyan doctrines of holiness) that until one receives a permanent in¬
dwelling of the Holy Spirit, the Christian will be constantly vulnerable to “sin.” It is a
stunningly rich first-person account of the family dynamics and social and emotional
implications involved for an Ndebele woman converted in the early decades of the
twentieth century. We include here Heisey’s note that preceded Moyo’s testimony.
                                                                     Wendy Urban-Mead


                                                          Going to School ♦           173
(This article was written and read on the last day of school at Mtshabezi
Mission by Qedabakwabo Moyo. She is the fourth child of her mother and
the only one living, three died in infancy. Her mother died while she was
yet an infant, leaving her in care of her mother s younger sister.
Qedabakwabo does not know just how long she lived with her aunt. She
only faintly remembers her as she also died, and Qeda was left motherless
the second time. Thus the meaning of her name is Qedabakwabo (the fin
ish of her people). After her aunt’s death she was cared for by her grand¬
mother who is still living. She is about 21 years of age, has yielded her life
to God, and is doing nicely as a helper in teaching the school.—M. E. H.)
   You who are at Mtshabezi today, I will tell you of my life. I am an
orphan and have been given a name which denotes misfortune. My name
is Qedabakwabo. I have no matter to tell you of my orphanhood only to
tell you the beginning of my life.
   I want to tell you of my living in sin, my conversion and my learning to
know God.
  When I was still quite young we did not live at Matyiya (one of the out
schools, her present home). WEere we lived at that time there was no Gospel,
and I lived in sin and according to our heathen customs. After I had grown a
little, I desired to go and see my father who lived at Matyamhlope (near
Bulawayo). I was only a little child, but I asked my grandmother and she con¬
sented. Now my heart was pained, as going to see my father meant leaving my
grandmother, and this was hard for me as I loved her very much. It was
arranged for me to go. I went, and while there I learned to know what a week
is. I also saw people go to meeting on Sunday, but I did not want to go.
    My half brother asked me to go, but I refused. He then wanted to teach
me from the speller (first book); to this I consented and learned a little
while there. When I returned home, I found my people had moved near
Matyiya school. I was glad. Before I went to see my father, I did not want
to learn; but now I desired to very much.
   After a time I went to visit some friends who lived near a school of the
London Missionary Society. Here I found that some of my friends had
repented. I desired to go with them to meeting, also to school. It was easy
for me to learn. It was at this place I learned to pray first.
   Now I was sorry because my people had moved to Matyiya. I thought it
would have been better had they moved here; and it would be better to learn
here, as I did not like the services at Matyiya because they testify and here
they do not. When I returned home I found that my people had not yet
repented, but were going to the services. I went along to meeting to see how
 it was. After a time the mqre I went the more I wanted to go, and was glad
when the day came for service. Jesus was beginning to work in my heart,
 and I did not know it. Now I wanted to stop drinking beer, but I was afraid
 of the people; I was afraid they would find fault if I stopped drinking.


174   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
   I went to school and found it was easy to learn; this increased my desire
lor learning. Now my heart began to fear God. I had confessed all of my
sins, but I loved Him and desired very much to leave the world and follow
Jesus. I desired very much to know that my sins were forgiven. I stopped
drinking beer and was no longer afraid of the people. I loved the Lord and
to sing praises to Him gave me much joy. I was tripped by Satan some¬
times, as I did not understand then as I do now. I was tempted very much
with dancing, as I loved it and knew that my dancing pleased the people;
also, I had much trouble with anger. After a time my love began to grow
cold and I did not love Jesus as I did before.
   I first learned to know what a year is in 1915. In the beginning of this
year our teacher said some of we girls should go to the mission and go to
school. I desired very much to go, but was afraid to ask the old people. One
girl went, this pained my heart. After a while some more girls went and
this only increased my desire. I wanted to be angry at the old people; still
I was afraid to ask them.
   I had not yet learned how many months there are in a year. At thresh¬
ing time my half brother came to see me and wanted to take me to see my
father, who had now moved about seven miles from the mission. I was very
glad, but I cried because it meant leaving grandma again. I went and
arrived safely. After a few days my brother asked me if I was going to the
mission and learn, but I refused. Sunday came and I went along to the mis¬
sion to services. This was the first I saw Mtshabezi Mission. I saw the girls;
now I desired very much to come soon. When we arrived home in the
afternoon, I told my brother that now I wanted to go and stay at the mis¬
sion. He said: Alright, speak to father. I did; he said, Alright, but you must
go and tell your grandparents. They sent some one to accompany me, as
they did not want me to go alone. My grandmother was very much sur¬
prised, but could not refuse, because my way was open to go to school.
   I returned to my father soon. My brother said, Now you must stay at the
mission twelve months I said, No, I will stay four months. On my arrival,
I was told to go and tell the missionary that I had come to stay; this I did.
He said, Alright, but the year is so near finished (August) now you will stay
next year as well. I had it in my heart to stay four months, but was afraid
to say so to the missionary, so I consented.
   When I came here I was reading in the first book. I liked to learn, but
the love of Jesus was not in my heart. I liked to stay at the mission very
much, but at the end of 1916 my people called me and I went home. By
this time the light of Jesus was beginning to come into my heart. I desired
very much to return to school. I prayed to the Lord and He opened my
way. As I yielded to Him, He was near me. After I was baptized it seemed
like my strength was finished. I was surprised as I knew my sins were for¬
given, and I had no condemnation, but it was hard to overcome. I was like
this until in July 1918 when the Holy Spirit came to dwell in my heart.
Praise the Lord He is still there, and now I have learned how to over-come


                                                 Going to School       ♦   175
by prayer and faith in Jesus. I thank Him for giving me the opportunity of
knowing Him also remaining in school a long time. I desire that I may
keep near Him and He abide with me and be my guide until I die. I find
the way of Jesus precious. I say the joy of the Way cannot be expressed.




   Nontsizi Mgqwetho, LISTEN, COMPATRIOTS!
                          South Africa 1924       isiXhosa


Virtually nothing is known about the life of Nontsizi Mgqwetho, the first and only
major female poet to write in Xhosa, apart from what is revealed in her writings,
almost all of which appeared in the Johannesburg newspaper Umteteli wa Bantu
between 1920 and 1929. In a poem published on 2 December 1922 lamenting the
death of her mother, she gives her mother’s name as Emmah Jane Mgqwetto (the
spelling predates the Xhosa orthographic revisions of 1936 and 1955), the daugh¬
ter of Zingelwa of the Cwerha clan, and associates her with the Hewu district near
Queenstown. Nontsizi Mgqwetho may have been educated in the Eastern Cape by
the Moravians, probably at Shiloh. The first poem Mgqwetho contributed to
Umteteli, published on 23 October 1920, is signed with her clan name, Cizama; it
was sent from Crown Mines in Johannesburg. Her last contribution to Umteteli
appeared on 5 January 1929.
   Politically, she adopts a position critical of the African National Congress and its
leaders, whom she castigates for fragmenting rather than unifying black opposition,
and constantly appeals for black unity in the face of white oppression: The title of a
poem published on 19 July 1924 is, in English translation, “Strangers strip people
selfishly squabbling.” She defends Marshall Maxeke, the first editor of Umteteli, and
celebrates his wife, the civil rights activist Charlotte Maxeke (see the text by her in
this volume). She praises members of the rural women’s resistance movement known
as the Amafelandawonye (Die-hards), and in a prose contribution published on 13
December 1924 records her own involvement in a mass demonstration in April 1919
against passes in Johannesburg. She is a firm supporter of the Women’s Christian
Union, one of the groups known as manyano, and was probably herself a member.
   Xhosa personal praise poems often employ hyperbole and caricature, and in this
poem Mgqwetho depicts herself as ungainly and unattractive, a fearless and outspo¬
ken poet whose poetry provokes controversy: “Your poetry puts paid to feminine
wiles,” she says, rolling up her sleeves. As the first Xhosa woman to publish her
poetry in considerable quantity, she sees herself as competing against the dominance
of male poets: She celebrates her own outspoken poetry, poetry that benefits the
African people and brings her fame, but that is also unpopular among envious poets
 and those who fault her for invading the traditional male preserve. (Only a male
 could serve as an imbongi, the court praise poet.) She also articulates here concerns
 that are evident throughout her body of published poetry: black rights, education
 and morals, especially with respect to young women in the cities, and the erosion of
Xhosa custom. A racy, urban tone is achieved in this poem by the incorporation of a
 number of English and Afrikaans words. The poem is alive with word play.
    Fearless, outspoken, committed, pious, contradictory, anguished, and often
 despairing, Mgqwetho eloquently articulates in her passionate poetry the political

 176   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
and social aspirations of black South Africans in the 1920s and their bitter frus¬
trations. A line that recurs in her poetry reads Hayi usizi kwizwe lenu, Nontsizi!,
“Oh the sorrow that seizes your country, Nontsizi!” This is a pun on her own name:
The Xhosa word for “sorrow” is usizi.
                                                                       Jeff Opland


                                        ♦

I sent Christmas, the old year and the new year, packing with praise poems.
Now I'm going to sing my own praises, and then Til move on again to start
something new. Mercy, all of you!


Peace, Nontsizi, renowned for your chanting,
Your poems are the nation’s bounty.
No elephant finds its own trunk clumsy.
Oh peace, hen of Africa with sheltering wing!


Hen shepherding chicks
Safe from the grasp of birds of prey,
The nation knows you, sky-python,
Poets sneer but discuss you.


Upset Phalo’s land, Mgqwetho,
Cast your shadow on nations and sap their strength.
Wild beast too vicious to take from behind,
Those in the know tremble in tackling you.


Peace, dusky woman with the colours of pools,
Your stench reeks like the river snake.
Mercy! Elephant browsing top shoots,
You’ve made a name for Mgqwetho.


Peace, Nontsizi, African maize tufts
Waving beneath the breeze,
You stubbed your toe and felt the pain,
A slip of the tongue and they stomped on you.


Peace, Nontsizi, African maize tufts,
You strip poetry bare and expose it
And the nation’s mountains face one another
As you sway from side to side.


Peace, dusky woman, Drakensberg snow
Like morning dew on Mount Hermon.
I stumbled in walking with whites:
Oh! I felt the cops’ cuffs on me.

                                                 Listen, Compatriots!      ♦   177
Peace, woman poet, Vaaibom’s flamingo,
Which thrusts its feet forward for take-off,
Which thrusts its feet backward to land:
All the animals come out to bask.


Peace, duck of the African thickets,
Ungainly girl with ill-shaped frame.
Oh, Nontsizi, African maize tufts,
With bow-legs like yours you’ll never marry!


Peace, woman poet of Africa with sheltering wing.
Make way! Ugh, I was used.
Peace, starling perched in a tig tree,
Your poetry puts paid to feminine wiles.


Peace, Nontsizi, African maize tufts,
Let spinsters again wear bodices
For no-one knows your ancestors:
Without skin skirts there’ll be no marriage.


Where are your daughters? What do you say?
“We roamed the countryside searching for marriage,
We walked away from home and dowry,
Now we’re milked though calfless, living with nobod


What’s education? Where are your sons?
They roamed the land searching for nothing,
Chickens scratching for scraps,
Eager at dawn, at dusk empty-handed.


Peace, Nontsizi, match-stick legs marked
From roaming through thornbrakes prophesying;
Oh, peace, poetic diviner,
Watch out, the wild bird’s flapping its wings.


Peace, Chizama, who eats her meat raw;
No-one knows your ancestors.
May the browsing elephants make it home:
If they stay in the open they’re lost.


Peace, Nontsizi, Sandile’s daughter,
 Child of one of the Ngqika chiefs.
You were thrashed on the Ngqika plains
 For praising chiefs and not commoners.




178   ♦   1920s to 1950s
Oh peace, Nontsizi, African maize tufts,
Woman, Africa’s walls are throbbing
With the sound of your lovely parties:
Oh shame! All the young men wither.


The day of your death will darken, Nontsizi,
The commando’s horse will lose its way.
Oh, peace! And to you, Ntsikana,
Who roamed through thornbrakes prophesying.


Mercy, Awesome Saint!
This then is what Ntsikana spoke of:
Little red people down on their knees,
Producing spells when they come to the Mpondo.


Fiery tractors ploughed our fathers’ land
And the black had no place to plough.
Mercy, Heavens! Mercy, Earth!
Mercy then, Sun! And mercy, Moon!


You keep our final accounts,
Present the statement to the Highest,
Make a careful case for us,
Where else will we go, Crocodile of the Pool?


Mighty Champion of Africa,
There’s the black approaching in tears.
“Agree?” “We agree! By the Cross’s Victor!
We agree! Yes, in truth, we agree!”


Oh! So says the enigmatic forest buck:
Toadstools reach up when she’s through scratching.


Keep scooping from the cask:
There lies the land of your ancestors,
Harassed by evil spirits.


So says someone disturbed to be spied on
By those bearing arms,
Who watch her even by lightning.
  Mercy!


                                                  Translated by Jeff Opland




                                             Listen, Compatriots!   ♦   179
         Baboni Khama, Mmakgama Khama,
         Milly Khama, awJ Oratile Sekgoma,
       Letter to the High Commissioner
                            Botswana 1926        Setswana


When Sekgoma, chief of the Bangwato after Khama III, died in 1925, his youngest
brother, Tshekedi, aged twenty, became regent for the four-year-old heir to the
throne, Seretse. Tshekedi had eight older sisters, among them Baboni, Mmakgama,
and Milly, who were not eligible for the regency because they were women.
Similarly, Oratile, Seretse’s eldest sister, did not qualify to be regent because she was
a woman. As their letter notes, however, female regency was not entirely unknown.
Gagoangwe and her daughter Ntebogang, for example, served as regents for the
Bangwaketse chief Bathoen II from 1923 to 1928 (see Ntebogang Ratshosa, Speech
to the Bangwaketse”). Their regencies (Gagoangwe, 1923-1924, and Ntebogang,
1924-1928) were formally recognized by the British, who believed they would pro¬
tect British interests. Tshekedi’s regency was also supported by the British, a fact that
contributed to the strength of his position against that of Oratile and his sisters.
   In 1925, a situation arose in which the young Tshekedi had to consolidate his
power not only over his older sisters, who challenged his regency, but also over his
niece, whose inheritance he controlled. As executor of Sekgoma’s property, he was
in a very strong position. He was able to consolidate his power and defeat the chal¬
lenges of his sisters and niece in part by maintaining control over their property.
When Oratile and her aunts Baboni, Mmakgama, and Milly challenged this con¬
trol, they were challenging his authority more generally as chief patriarch of the
Bangwato and, by implication, the structures of a patriarchy that allowed male jun¬
ior members of a family to administer the affairs of their female seniors as if those
seniors were children.
   Interestingly, Baboni, Mmakgama, Milly, and Oratile mention specifically that
they are not “claiming the chieftainship or regency,” but it is evident that they are
involved in political maneuvering, using the languages of both the Sengwato and
the British colonialists to alter the situation to their own benefit. (The expression
“Pula!” [Rain!] is a common Setswana invocation of blessings and prosperity. See
“Speech to the Bangwaketse.”)
                                Leloba Molema, Nobantu Rasebotsa, and Mary Lederer


                                            ♦

21st July 1926


To His Excellency The Earl of Athlone
High Commissioner and Governor General of South Africa


 May it please Your Excellency—



180    ♦   1920s TO 1950s
  We the undersigned daughter of the late Chief Sekgoma, and the
daughters of the late Chief Khama—Do hereby and solemnly petition to
Your Most Excellency that since my father and our brother the late Chief
Sekgoma’s death, we never had peace with the Regent chief Tshekedi, who
is my halt uncle and our half brother. This grievious misunderstandings
which led to our serious destruction, were caused by dl-natured men who
planned fatal intrigues and conspiracies every now and then against us
(Khama s family). Men who caused the recent trouble and riot are traitors
in the affairs ot our tribe, most of them were the ringleaders during the
famous Revolt of Sekgoma against his father Khama in 1898 and were
responsible for his long exile. These are the men who today, again took
advantage of the innocent young blood of Khama (Regent) and themselves
led by a man named Phethu, are the dictators.
  Can His Excellency expect truthfulness, goodwill and righteousness
from such men as described? Never. Proper leaders are lacking in once the
tribe of your servant Khama. During the trial a lot was mentioned about
ridiculous native laws and customs, which as you know Khama had totally
abolished, and now that Khama is dead, they seem to revive them every
now and then. Once sacred places of Khama have been turned by traitors,
into a witchcraft den. Christianity has been trodden under foot, Chaka’s
military system of destruction, long abolished, is the system they applaud.
Such inhumane and tyrannical practices we have never known before.
  It is a big mistake for our Administration to think that we are claiming
the chieftainship or regency. Which we could do without fear, had we that
intention, surely we have rightful claim, but we never had such wish
although we [see] some of our neighbouring tribes as [having] chieftai-
ness, [we claim] nothing but that we upon as daughters with right to our
natural position with right to our private affairs. It will surprise Your
Excellency that even when instal my uncle and our brother they never dis¬
cuss the question to us merely to provoke us and to bring us into unneces¬
sary dispute.   They entered into the Estate of the two chiefs without
anything being mentioned to us, the family of deceased.
  Facts known to the tribe made by Khama to members of his family, were
in our case stripped from us. Khama’s law was equal to both sexes, women
had the same right as men. Estate were always proportionally divided to
the deceased family, sons and daughters. But in our case they wish it to be
different, and in this letter, we appeal to Your Most Excellency that we
claim reasonable shares as laid by Khama in the past, and that we ask Your
Exellency to give kind consideration to our prayer.
  Your Excellency, may recall back,
(a) Sir Charles Warren in 1885 when Khama invites BRITISH PROTECTION.
(b) When he crossed the great ocean waves to meet the Great Mother of
   orphans and destitutes like ourselves.
(c) With Rhodes he founded Rhodesia, and extend telegraph’s line to
   Salisbury.


                             Letter to the High Commissioner        ♦   181
(d) Great African chiefs took up arms against Her Majesty’s forces, alone
    he laid down his shield before Her Majesty’s feet. He alloted vast tracts
   of land to the Crown.
  Your Excellency, are these not honourable deeds to squash off guilt and
shame and destruction made against his family by traitors. This is the time
that we should be helped we are wretched and helpless, though we are pro¬
voked and rendered homeless by our enemies under cover of the innocent
young regent. And our last request is that we humbly pray that Your
Excellency’s visit may God signal it by the discharge of two of our family
who are suffering in gaol through hatred [of] our enemies. Sir, turn Your
Excellency’s ear to our cry wretched, ruined, insulted women we are.
           Pula! Pula! Pula!
   We have the Acting Resident Commissioner Lieut. Colonel Daniel who
has started his official life with Khama many years ago, who we are sure
knows Khama’s good ways better and above all the position and the
intrigues of our tribe.
   We are
           Your most obedient servants
            Baboni
            Mmakgama
            Oratile
            Milly


                                             Transcriber and translator unknown




   Oratile Sekgoma, INHERITANCE: TWO LETTERS
                          Botswana 1926, 1929      Setswana


Southern Africans know who Seretse Khama was: the firstApresident of independ¬
ent Botswana, a founding member of the            Southern African Development
Community (SADC), who married a British woman, Ruth Williams, and angered
the fledgling apartheid state in South Africa under D. F. Malan, the first South
African prime minister after the National Party victory in 1948. The popular press
talked about this “Native Chief” marrying a “white girl.” Others know Seretse
Khama as the heir to the Ngwato throne, who as such was meticulously educated at
Tigerkloof (perhaps the foremost college preparatory institution for students from
Botswana), Fort Hare, and Oxford, by his uncle Tshekedi Khama, who was the
regent. He was knighted by the queen of England and is revered for the legacy of
peace and nonracialism in Botswana.
   But not many people know that Seretse Khama had a sister Oratile (daughter
 of Sekgoma’s first wife), easily twenty years older than Seretse. She of course never
went to Oxford, although her meticulous and clear handwriting, almost textbook
 perfect, indicates that she received some schooling. She was married to her cousin
 Simon Ratshosa, who was banished to Francistown for having made an attempt on


 182   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
Tshekedi’s life. Tshekedi was Sekgoma’s youngest brother and the uncle of both
Oratile and Simon.
   The letters of 1926 and 1929, written by Oratile (as well as the letter of 1926
cowritten with her aunts, Baboni Khama, Mmakgama Khama, and Milly Khama
[see Letter to the High Commissioner”]), demonstrate how royal women appealed
to British authorities in an attempt to gain redress in inheritance issues. Thus the
struggle between Tshekedi Khama and, on the one hand, his niece Oratile
Sekgoma, and, on the other, his sisters Baboni Khama, Mmakgama Khama, and
Milly Khama, must be understood in the context of a larger power struggle rooted
in succession and social welfare arrangements. Oratile’s letters refer to the reforms
in inheritance that Khama III had instituted and that Tshekedi was in the process
ol reversing. After Sekgoma’s death, Oratile claimed her inheritance of “5000 head
of cattle, 2500 head of small stock, and £15,000 in cash” and sued Tshekedi for
withholding it. She lost the case. In addition, she attempted to recover the property
that she lost when it was attached and sold to pay debts incurred by her husband,
Simon Ratshosa. She lost that case as well.
   In its original Setswana—freshly translated here—the 1926 letter has a distinctly
oral quality: The cadence, rhythm, imagery, and other emphatic devices allow us to
hear her speaking directly to the British, impressing them with her urgency. This let¬
ter and others by her demonstrate strong opposition to the patriarchal system in
Botswana society which subordinates women to men of the same age or even younger.
   The second letter, which we have only in the court’s English, is written from
Francistown where Oratile Sekgoma joined her husband in exile after withdraw¬
ing her appeal to the Privy Council in London, in favor of an administrative set¬
tlement. The Privy Council was the highest colonial court of appeal.
                                              Leloba Molema and Nobantu Rasebotsa


                                          ♦


Palapye Rd.
26 September 1926
Your Honour,
I am writing to you with great sorrow about my life. I am the eldest daugh¬
ter of Chief Sekgoma. I have wandered with my father from Lephephe to
Nekati in his illness and grief, being his only child for many years and
keeping him company. In 1912 my father made his first will. He said that
when he died all his wealth would be Oratile Sekgoma’s, and the person
who would look after it would be Chief Sekgoma, son of Letsholathebe, at
Kavimba. A copy of this letter will be found in my father’s house; it was
there during my father’s illness.
   I was with my father when he made his second will in 1921. We were in
Francistown, on our way to Nekati to prepare for our return to Serowe. The
will said, “All the cattle I have are my father’s, and my child, Oratile, must be
given five of my cattleposts: (1) Baabare, (2) Seisa, (3) Ntloeagae, and two
other big cattleposts of mine of her choice. My child must not be hindered in
anything that is mine.” In 1922 I showed the will to my grandfather, Khama.
He did not open it but gave it back to me, sealed with red wax bearing the


                                           Inheritance: Two Letters           ♦   183
impression of my father’s ring, SK. Khama told me to look after it well. I gave
the will to Mr George Smith in 1923 to keep it for me in his safe.
  In 1925 my father died and I took the will and went with it to Mafikeng.
I asked Mr Minchin to open it. He did so in front of me and Simon
[Ratshosa] and Mr Kelly. I took it back with me to Serowe, only to find my
houses in flames.
  When we moved to Serowe, my father bought me cattle from the white
people of Serowe. Other cattle he bought for me from Mrs Blackbeard.
These cattle are different from those mentioned in the will. They are cattle
that had been mine when my father was still alive. Some of them were
brought to me on the hoof, for milking. They are at Mooke.
   Tshekedi has confiscated every one of my cattle without saying a word
to me. I am shocked that he has burnt down my houses when I have done
him no wrong, and that he has gone further and confiscated my cattle that
my father gave me. How, Your Honour, am I to support myself when I have
been robbed of cattle that are indisputably mine? What shall I remember
my father by if all that he left me has been set alight?
   Your Honour, I ask you to consider my situation. In 1923 when Khama
died my father succeeded him. My father did not take revenge on Semane s
household. He confiscated neither the many cattle nor took a small por¬
tion of the thousands of pounds that Khama had left them. My father will¬
ingly let them have all that was theirs. My father died in 1925               in
November, and in December Tshekedi proceeded to single me out as his
main target. He ignored the good that my father had done not only for
him, but also for his mother and his sister. My father, Sekgoma, gladly
handed over to them all their property, not in kgotla [the men’s meeting
place], as their cattle were not community cattle or even the cattle of ser¬
vants. It is tribal cattle, for example, the milk of which is distributed to ser¬
vants, that are controlled by the kgotla. I am surprised, therefore, that the
cattle that my father gave me should be a matter for discussion by the
kgotla. I am surprised that such discussion should take place at all, as my
cattle were given me by my father in the same way as any parent puts aside
property for the benefit of his child. Even if my father had not made a will,
I would still have the full right to inherit a portion of his property. A third
 of my father’s cattle is due me. My younger brother, Seretse, must receive
 the largest share of the cattle because he is my chief. My cattle which have
 been confiscated, together with those mentioned in the will, do not make
 even half of my father’s wealth in cattle.
   Your Honour, Tshekedi’s desire is that I should get nothing at all of my
 father’s wealth. I wonder, then, why my father bore me. It is the first time I
 have seen a person robbed of property given her by her father. Listen care¬
 fully to me, Your Honour. I do not want to have anything to do with the
 chieftainship. I have never desired to rule the Bangwato. What I am saying
 is this: the government must help me to get my property. It is my right. I
 am Sekgoma’s daughter. It is my right to sustain my life. Every man, when


 184   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
he accumulates cattle, accumulates them for his child. No household sub¬
sists at the expense of another.


                   I stop here, Your Honour, with humility.
                   Oratile Sekgoma


                                                Translated by Leloba Molema
Francistown
31st August 1929


The Resident Magistrate, Serowe.


Sir,
              Re Oratile Sekgoma vs. Acting Chief Tshekedi Khama.
I have the honour to write you that owing to extreme vagueness and lack
of satisfactory arrangements in connection with the above matter, I regret
to say I am not satisfied with the Regent’s long concealed plans of admin¬
istering my lather’s estate.
   It is my wish to come to a peaceful arrangement with Chief Tshekedi if
possible than to enter into dispute, but he has proved himself to be stub¬
born and inflexible in his misguided opinion, as if he is not the product of
a new environment. He is advised to pursue upon the primitive old customs
and laws, which as every one knows had long been abolished by Khama
since attaining de facto and de jure sovereign of the Bamangwato. Judging
however, from my experience the Regent is still young, and has none of
those qualities which had distinguished his great and venerable father; he
therefore, needs the closest attention of the Government to teach him to
learn to think in the new ways of new things, to perform his duties as Chief.
   It is, of course extremely difficult at this stage to make him give up old
cherished ideas, and crack the crust of his inflated personal habits, the rea¬
son being that from the very beginning of his chieftainship he had been
taught to handle the reins of power in an autocratic way; worse still, he fell
into the hands of incapable and treacherous advisers of no social standing.
It is therefore, impossible for him to be expected to attempt to solve this
question in circumstances that constitute the gravest kind of misrepresen¬
tations without the guidance or dictatorship of the Government.
   Sir, you will no doubt agree that strongly as I feel, and recognise the
honesty of the Government, I have been extremely patient as regards my
claims to property and birth-right share as one of the two deceased chief’s
heirs namely Seretse and myself. The Chieftainship I have never wished
for—I have been quite satisfied with my position as long as my natural
rights were respected.
(a) At Capetown, Sir Herbert Sloley came to say the last goodbye in a rail¬
       way compartment which my father and myself had occupied. Sir Herbert
       enquired from me “who would be the Chief?” “My infant brother


                                        Inheritance: Two Letters       ♦   185
      Seretse, but Tshekedi would be called to act as Regent,      said I.
(b) At Mafeking, Colonel Ellenberger asked me the same question. I still
      replied in the same way.
(c) At Serowe in the Magistrates Court before Magistrate Captain Neal,
      Colonel Ellenberger repeated the question to me. I still replied in the
      affirmative, recognising Tshekedi as Regent and Executor, adding that
      my rights and interests as Sekgoma’s daughter should be protected.
(d) That Tshekedi has also my assurance in black and white immediately
      after my father’s tragic death.
(e) That at a moment when the            infuriated mob had sought to            kill
      Tshekedi’s mother (Semane) accusing her of being a witch to have
      administered a native poison to my deceased parent, in order that
      Tshekedi, her son, may be the Chief. I was not in favour of that move¬
      ment. The     mob was then unsuccessful in their perfidious            action
      because I did not participate.
(f) In April my cattle posts etc. given to me by my father were all confis¬
      cated by the Chief. The drastic action of the Chief still remains a mys¬
      tery to me.
(g) In July 1926 I addressed a Petition to His Excellency the High Com¬
      missioner in connection with these affairs.
(h) In August 1926 His Excellency in person, after attending Kgotla
      Meeting, commanded Tshekedi, myself and Khama’s daughters to
      attend the magistracy; all representative officials were also present.
    His Excellency informed me that he had been made to understand that
I   refused   to    recognise Tshekedi   as   Chief,   that   I   must   leave   the
Bamangwato country as he was determined to put a stop to this internal
family strife. Time would be given me, where I desired to go, and that
Tshekedi would make arrangements as to my property etc. Not a word was
uttered, for the Great One had given his final decision, like a father to his
children who punishes and at last forgives. I obeyed His Excellency’s stern
order and crossed into Tati Territory.
    Sir, what is then expected of me? The Chief had at the outset made
promises to His Honour the Resident Commissioner that in view of the
fact he was interviewing his head men to deal in my share.
    In March 1928 I was compelled at last to lay down my claims before the
Magistrate; thereupon Tshekedi made a statement before the Magistrate,
that he would be quite willing to settle this family matter without going to
law. I was advised to withdraw the case to wait and see.
    Sir, call to mind that I have been begging for the last three years gnawing
the bones without receiving support from Tshekedi in a strange country, and
hardly able to get one meal a day. Messrs. Haskins and Sons picked me up
lost, and gave me shelter. You will further admit that my claims and share
are more than reasonable ak compared with enormous value of the estate.
    Is it not high time that I should [disclose] my precarious position to the
Government, to ask the Government to do me justice, to hasten the time


186    ♦   1920s TO 1950s
to bestow pity on me, a wretched and simple woman, much too weak to
oppose Tshekedi and the whole consistory of Serowe? Their hearts are
crammed with arrogance and falsehood, for they have blown the straw
between me and Tshekedi, and in truth I trust them not in my case.
  Sir, Can you think that any Mongwato dare give me counsel or he a
known friend against the Chief’s pleasure, ’though he be grown so desper¬
ate to be honest? NEVER! Have I not striven to be patient with the Regent
’though I knew he had been ill-advised to hate me, turn me away and let
the foulest contempt crown me, and to give me up to the sharpest kind of
injustice—unparalleled in the history of any tribe? I am the most degraded
and wretched woman, drained of wealth I once possessed, and my energies
cramped by a sordid system of misrepresentations to which my interests
have been unlawfully sacrificed for the benefit of others. Piles of my hered¬
itary wealth have been accumulated by Tshekedi to his own portion and
daily feeding the fortunate favourites with property I had earned with
devoted love to my father during those days of painful and heartrending
illness and twenty years of his wandering and long exile.
   Like the lily that was once mistress of the garden and flourished beau¬
tifully, I have been thrown out to hang my head and perish in exile, with
nobody to cheer me in pain. Power and honour seem to have vanished, but
riches of my father remain to be faithfully apportioned to the heirs.
   Sir, I do not intend to wander from the good advice the Government
might be aiming at, and if I have used myself unmannerly, pray forgive me,
and this time do my service to His Honour the Resident Commissioner to
at his pleasure place this pathetic Letter to His Excellency the Great Lion
of South Africa at his palatial den.
                              I have the honour to be,
                              Sir,
                              Yours respectfully,
                              ORATILE SEKGOMA


                                                               Translator unknown




                   Ntebogang Ratshosa,
              Speech to the Bangwaketse
                            Botswana 1928       Setswana


Ntebogang was the daughter of Bathoen I of the Bangwaketse and Gagoangwe of the
Bakwena. She was the last child of her mother’s second marriage; her mother,
Gagoangwe, was first married to the chief of the Bakgatla and then to the chief of the
Bangwaketse. Ntebogang ruled as regent for her nephew Bathoen II after her brother,
Seepapitso III, father of Bathoen II, was murdered by their brother Moeapitso.
Gagoangwe is reported to have said, after Moeapitso murdered Seepapitso II, that


                                          Speech to the Bangwaketse           ♦   187
since one of her breasts had been cut off, let the other one be cut off too; Moeapitso
was subsequently executed by the colonial authorities.
   Ntebogang delivered the speech printed below on the occasion of Bathoen II s
accession to the chieftainship of the Bangwaketse in 1928. It was originally deliv¬
ered in Setswana (the Setswana version is apparently no longer extant) and trans¬
lated into English for the official records of the Bechuanaland Protectorate.
Ntebogang’s speech lists and repeats, a style that is typical of Setswana oratory. In
addition to all dignitaries who must be acknowledged and welcomed on formal
occasions, Ntebogang recognized all other people present, referring to the com¬
monly held Tswana view that the chief is the chief because of all the people.
   A Setswana proverb states that the king is a receptacle into which all kinds of
rubbish is thrown. Ntebogang is certainly alluding to this proverb when she “wel¬
comes” the thieves and liars, but she also introduces the new chief as “your son,
putting him at the service of the family that includes all such members.
   Ntebogang uses two expressions that refer to Tswana cultural practices and
beliefs. First, “strange” cattle are matimela, lost or stray cattle. At regular times, the
chief sends a regiment to collect such cattle, and they are brought to the commu¬
nity kraal, where they are claimed by their owners, who must produce evidence of
ownership of the brand. Second, the Setswana expression “Pula!” (translated as
“Rain!”) is a common invocation for blessings, prosperity, and good luck. Because
Botswana is mostly desert, rain is extremely important: even the unit of currency
is the Pula. “Pula!” can be used either at the end of speech, as Ntebogang has done,
or at the beginning. Often when the speaker calls “Pula!” the audience will respond
with “Pula!” As this speech closes, the translator has inserted an “etc.” to indicate
that Ntebogang was concluding her speech according to formulaic patterns.
                                Mary Lederer, Leloba Molema, and Nobantu Rasebotsa


                                            ♦

It is a thanksgiving to-day on the event God has brought for us. We have
our Resident Commissioner and Resident Magistrate here and all the
Bangwaketse, also the European population. We are collected for the cere¬
mony of one man. I present your son to you to-day. Let him be your Chief
in peace. You Bathoen, your own people have presented themselves to you
that you may be their Chief. Rich and poor are presented to you. There are
wizards in the tribe, they are presented to you, thieves also are presented to
you, liars are presented to you, everyman rich and poor is presented to you
according to his position. Whatever he be everyone is yours—they are like
wives married by one man—wives of one man never love one another, and
these wives of yours will belie that. One woman speaks evil of another take
no notice—-know that the person is yours. Try to know your mind not from
hearsay. There are stranger tribes among us to-day, and I also present those
to you. There is Chief Letlamoreng of the Barolong here—he is also your
subject, you are also his chief. You judge one another. Present are our
Resident Commissioner aAd our Resident Magistrate, they are presented to
you also. They have been invited to see the man whom the Bangwaketse
will obey. And all the white people are presented to you. You can sometimes


188   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
assist them as on the other day you collected the strange cattle and each
came and claimed his property and took it away and lastly we hand you over
to God. You also give yourself to God. As the Bangwaketse are to you so
you are to God etc. May God bless his work. Rain!


                                                Transcriber and translator unknown


 Florence Nol'ivandle Jabavu, BANTU HOME LIFE
                            South Africa 1928       English


Florence Tandiswa Nolwandle Makiwane was born in Tyume village near Alice in
1895. In 1908 she enrolled in Lovedale’s College Department; in 1911 she gradu¬
ated with a certificate in elementary teaching and began teaching at Lovedale. In
1915 and then again in 1922, her parents sent her to Kingsmead College in
Birmingham to study music. She married D. D. T. Jabavu, a university professor,
writer, preacher, and political activist, thus forging a union between two of the
most prominent Christian families in the Eastern Cape at that time. She and her
husband had four children, one of whom, Noni Jabavu, is also represented in this
anthology (see “Bus Journey to Tsolo”). Fiercely independent, Florence Jabavu was,
to quote Phyllis Ntantala’s autobiography, “a brave woman who was prepared to
fight for those things she believed in.”
   When she wrote “Bantu Home Life,” Jabavu was an important figure in child
welfare work in the Cape Province. She launched the zenzele (do it yourself)
movement in the Eastern Cape in 1927 in order to teach domestic skills to rural
women. Her essay was one of several chosen by Rev. James Dexter Taylor for inclu¬
sion in Christianity and the Natives of South Africa: A Yearbook of South African
Missions (1928). Her essay reflects a generally positive attitude toward the mis¬
sionary influence, as can be expected from a public-spirited Christian activist.
(Indeed, her husband referred to her as a nonordained African missionary.) The
people she cites were all actively involved in missionary work and in liberal polit¬
ical endeavors in South Africa.
   Her own assessment, however, sees the negative impact of colonialism, setting
the disintegration of family life against the limited improvement in the lives of
rural people. She contradicts the missionary view (held also by her husband) that
under polygamy African women were humiliated and exploited chattels, high¬
lighting instead the independence, industriousness, and collective supportiveness
of group work, and the absence of these characteristics from the individualized
domestic service in which these women have now been employed. While men and
boys are trained in industrial skills that broaden their opportunities, women in
domestic labor become dependent and passive.
  Institutionalizing a view that equates femininity with domesticity, the missionaries
and the colonials located African women in the domestic sphere, yet Jabavu’s critique
of Westernization points to the lowering of the quality of African home life:
Aspirations for a complicated, foreign lifestyle led to alcoholism and moral disintegra¬
tion. Against the missionary view that Westernization would improve life for women,
Jabavu held that home life was being destroyed by African women’s incorporation into
colonial society and, in particular, by the colonial interference in women’s central place
in the African home in the context of the migratory labor system for men.

                                                         Bantu Home Life          ♦   189
   On the other hand, Jabavu commends the women’s manyano movements for
their initiative—manyano is a Xhosa word that means       union or togetherness.
These movements (still very active throughout South Africa) were religious for¬
mations of solidarity for women, crucial in times of economic and social transition,
if insufficiently focused on the training women needed for a fast-changing world.
                                                                   V. M. Sisi Maqagi

                                         ♦


Life in the Kraals.
“No people can rise above the standard of its own women” is a saying
which is very old, but, nevertheless, full of meaning, especially in the pres¬
ent case when the spiritual development of the great Bantu race is under
consideration by a combined organization of missionaries.
   It will be best to trace the development of Native Home Life from its ear¬
liest stages, that is, life as it was in earliest times, unsophisticated by the pres¬
ence of Europeans. One writer has depicted it thus: “The exploration of the
dark-forested hinterland of South Africa a hundred years ago, was a matter of
gravest peril and risk to the body and health of the traveller, missionary and
adventurer. The country swarmed with vicious beasts and reptiles whose influ¬
ence seemed to render human beings equally savage. Even in the [eighteen-
]sixties conditions had apparently been little altered; for we read in a Sesuto
novel of how two Basuto had to run for dear life somewhere between
Grahamstown and Keiskamahoek, being hotly chased by Xosa highway rob¬
bers who infested the bush, living on the spoils gotten from the murdered bod¬
ies of innocent travellers, and how these men traversed roads strewn with
skulls of victims for several weeks until they eventually emerged in the envi¬
rons of Queenstown. Ours was a land of internecine feuds and unbroken war¬
fare, anarchy and devastation. The Bantu, although they boasted a sound
system of communistic tribalism, lived a social life that may be described, from
the religious viewpoint, as a haunted nightmare of uncertainty and tyrannical
witchcraft. Who of us can forget the terror that must have prevailed in the
time of the Zulus ofTshaka and the Ama-Ngwane of JMatiwane, or the des¬
olation of superstition brought about by the dictation of the false prophetess
Nongqause? The life of a woman, especially, it not even yet an ideal and idyl¬
lic one, was one of absolute subjection dominated by polygamous manhood,
while man himself lived in constant dread of murderous foes and malicious
ambushes. There was no room for hope, no happy anticipation of an afterlife,
no spiritual outlook. This was the atmosphere of the social conditions braved
by the early missionaries. They must have been animated by a remarkable
spiritual zeal. To have changed such a situation within the brief span of a cen¬
tury into what we see to-day, bespeaks energetic work and prayerful devo¬
tion.” (D. D. T. Jabavu in “What Methodism has done for the Natives.”)
   To-day what we know a^ kraal life is no longer what it was a hundred years
ago. It has since been affected at many points by the presence of Europeans.
The power of the Native chief has been modified. Family discipline has
undergone rapid disintegration. But some of the old family restraints are still

190   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
traceable, such as that of the relation of daughter to mother, and son to father.
All home duties are performed at the dictation ol parents. Among these one
may mention house-errands and helping in daily work. Life is simple and
obedience is absolute. Furniture is of the scantiest description. Women are
engaged mostly in outdoor work such as cultivation of the fields, fetching
water, collecting wood, thatching houses, sewing clothing, selling wares in
towns—all this being the occupation of women as well as a training in home
management for the girls. The boys, who are under the rule of their fathers,
are engaged in herding sheep, goats, calves and cattle, and keeping these away
from the fields. They assist their fathers in wagon expeditions and they go out
to work in sugar plantations, farms, and in diamond and gold mines for the
purpose of raising cash, wherewith to pay the government tax dues, as well as
to provide food supplies for their homes.
   In connection with traditional customs, we find that the girls partake in
certain organised dancing and amusements which mostly occur during the
seasons of the first fruits (e.g. Indlame and Ingcube in the Transkeian
Territories), and at harvest time. There are also the ceremonies of puberty
rites, wedding carnivals and the preparation of Native beer.
   The boys engage in hunting, dances, sham stick fighting as well as seri¬
ous fights often attended with death casualties.
  With regard to man, he is father to every boy he meets, possessing the
unquestioned right to chastise any boy negligent in his duty. He is absolute
head of the family, but is subject to his Chief in his communistic life.
   This life is quite ample for its state, but it lacks idealism. It has no
motive for morality beyond slavish obedience to custom and law. Its roots
are embedded in conservatism, which means doing exactly as what one’s
predecessors did, on pain of being smelt out as an enemy of society with
ostracism as a consequence. The aim is that of maintaining one dreary level
of equality of status among all men. He that dares to be ambitious enough
to rise above the common level does so at a risk to himself, because any
such advance towards fame and wealth is tacitly prohibited. Progressive
people are discouraged; while a premium is placed on stagnation.
  The saving grace of this life, however, is that there is no subjection in eco¬
nomic life. As contrasted with the common belief that African women are
mere chattels to their husbands, one may mention that they enjoy a certain
measure of independence in the economic protection of the home inasmuch
as they were entirely responsible for such duties as thatching of houses, dec¬
oration of homes, the provision of cooking utensils, the weaving of mats and
the supply of toilet requisites. The system of polygamy was such that each
woman had to be the executive manager of her household, having a definite
arable field and live stock allotted to her house, and thus having to husband
her resources all the year round with complete self-accountability without
having to appeal to her spouse for the provision of multifarious minor needs.
Life was also rendered tolerable by the varied character of outdoor occupa¬
tions that were pursued under the system of group working. While the


                                                    Bantu Home Life       ♦   191
civilised woman works individually, the kraal women joined in companies in
getting together grass for thatching, water and wood for the household. In
scuffling the fields, they generally combine and go through the fields in
turns. This took away much of the monotony otherwise inevitably experi¬
enced by the independent individual worker under civilised conditions.
  The present servant system under which a woman is confined to one
specific job such as cooking in the kitchen or nursing children year in year
out may thus be seen to be in conflict with Bantu tradition and psychol¬
ogy; and it is no wonder that there is much unsettlement and even rest¬
lessness in Bantu young women employed in towns under modern
conditions; for in such cases they seek employment only for the purpose of
raising funds for particular objects and do not enter into the vocation as a
permanent life work.


Effects of Westernism.
The primitive life has to-day been considerably changed by Western mod¬
ernism, by which we imply the introduction of Christianity, education and
Western civilisation.
 In outline these are the most apparent effects of the advent of these
influences:
   Windows have been introduced in the huts, making for some hygienic
improvement; there is more furniture, in the shape of chairs, tables, bed¬
steads, saddles, crockery and linen; there is more bodily apparel in the form
of trousers for men (compelled by government laws against nudity), over¬
coats, ornaments like brass bangles, making for vanity, stimulated by coun¬
try trading shops. Employment amongst whites has produced new tastes
for foods like coffee and sugar and the like, which in turn have resulted in
greater living expense. Missions have established country day schools where
the arts of reading and writing have been acquired, bringing the people in
direct touch with civilisation, with the result that they have been attracted
into towns whither they continuously drift to their supposed Eldorado. This
exodus is also explained by the fact that these new ne'eds and tastes can no
longer be provided by the meagre earnings of rural life. Nevertheless this has
given them a widened outlook and an enlarged world of hope and ambition.
The mere act of travelling, bringing them into contact with new ideas, has
proved to be a vast education inasmuch as they get to unlearn much of what
they had been taught at the mission stations when they see the flagrant des¬
ecration of the Sabbath by whites in towns. Migration into towns also brings
them into the ambit of pass laws with their resultant criminality (see the
recent committee report of the Johannesburg Joint Council which enlarges
on the subject on “Lawlessness among Johannesburg Natives.”)
   Government legislation on land questions together with the natural
increase of population witn its concomitant of congestion has resulted in
much landlessness which has in turn resulted in the homelessness of many
people and the degradation of the ideals of home life. Westernism has,


192   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
however, produced tranquility and order in place of the old unsettlement
and tribal friction. The worst forms ol superstition have been reduced.
Death by smelling out has been eliminated, and life is more secure. In mis¬
sion stations life is now characterized by a new spiritual life due to the
reading of the Bible and the conduct of family prayers, morning and
evening—thus bringing about a new form of dignity, greater tenderness,
more sympathy, absence of cruelty and new idealism.
  The degrading customs of female puberty rites and circumcision cere¬
monies have been largely destroyed.
  The position of man has been greatly altered. His authority is less
absolute because under modern conditions he is unable to raise money to
meet the increased needs of the family. The young men who are the most
able-bodied males in the community are almost continually away working
in the industrial centres for the support of their homes, and this has given
them a new feeling of independence from the fathers who, being regularly
at home awaiting the return of their sons, are placed in the humiliating
position of being suppliant to their sons. This condition of things has
undone the old fashioned form of discipline. Nowadays a man dare not, as
in the kraal, chastise any delinquent boy, on pain of being brought before
the magistrate and punished for assault in accordance with European law.
  The old Bantu communism is rapidly giving way to Western individualism.
  It is encouraging, in face of all these disintegrating factors due to the
transition stage, that we have constructive institutions that are destined to
prove helpful to the development of the Bantu people in their upward
progress in culture. Such are the innumerable elementary schools in the
rural and urban areas; the secondary schools especially in the Cape and
Natal Provinces, and the Fort Hare College which is the culminating
achievement of missionary work. Bantu literature has developed by leaps
and bounds under the encouragement of the mission press.
  The gratitude of the Bantu goes out to the American Zulu Mission
Board for taking the unusual but admirable forward move of setting apart
a missionary like the Rev. R. E. Phillips, B.A., for the special duty of devel¬
oping the recreation of Bantu youth in a town like Johannesburg, and who
with Dr. F. B. Bridgman has been instrumental in the establishment of the
Bantu Men’s Social Centre.


Weaknesses.
The advent of Westernism has not, as we have already seen, been an
unmixed blessing. Together with the good there has been a number of
weaknesses which we may here touch upon. The chief difficulty encoun¬
tered by the Natives has been that they are striving after a civilisation of
which they have very little inside knowledge, practical experience and guid¬
ance. Those who see the inside of a European’s house are there only as ser¬
vants and therefore never assimilate anything of the true home life except
the externals; whilst there are many who would regard it as derogatory and


                                                  Bantu Home     Life   ♦   193
humiliating to go out as servants. In following what they have seen they
find life too costly for their circumstances and fail to make ends meet.
Wages are always insufficient for the life they are anxious to lead, and the
result is unsettledness and an unhappy home life and also lack of control
over children. In one case a certain woman, whose husband was a teacher,
finding the economic pinch severe, left her husband, to carry on her pro¬
fession elsewhere, visiting her home only periodically. In another similar
case the young married woman has gone to work at a place too far away lor
her even to make periodic visits to her husband. In two other cases both the
young married women are engaged in work which makes it impossible for
them to attend to their family at home during the day. Under the circum¬
stances the children are left either with imperfect supervision or have to
fend for themselves. In most cases the environment in which the civilised
Native lives is squalid, there being no flowers nor trees to make the home
attractive. The congestion of houses, themselves badly built, has made for
bad health conditions resulting in appalling death-rate figures, particularly
in infants and children. The figures of infantile mortality make sad reading.
They range between 100 and 650 deaths per thousand, where under better
conditions they would range between 30 and 200; e.g., in Virginia, U.S.A,
they range between 32 and 156 according to a recent report.
   The evil of drink has aggravated the situation because it has served to
deplete the already insufficient income of the bread-winner. It has degraded
the moral life of whole communities, so much so that it is quite common
for one to find certain portions of Native locations correctly but unfortu¬
nately called Sodom and Gomorah. The moral conscience has been so
dulled that there is no upright public opinion, and these circumstances of
degradation have come to be accepted as the natural order of things.
   The women in their daily round of home duties have lost that variety of
combined occupations which we have mentioned as being associated with
kraal life.
   On the one hand, men, owing to their migration to industrial centres,
obtain a broadened view of life by coming in contact with a larger world;
on the other hand, women, being tied down, tend to become narrow in
vision and interest. The training of womanhood has much to do with the
situation, because the tendency in training centres has been to lay the most
emphasis upon the training ol boys and men rather than girls and women.
Notwithstanding the existence of such wide movements as the Women’s
Manyano, which owe their origin to the initiative of the Native women
themselves, the missions have neglected to train their womenfolk with the
same intensive method as they prepare the menfolk for being exhorters, lay
preachers, evangelists, and other forms of leadership.
   The woman as manager of the home has not been afforded a propor¬
tionate advance in the attatude with which she is viewed and should be
respected. Consequently there is a sort of inferiority complex aided and
abetted by Europeans to the disadvantage of the Native woman. This is


194   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
gradually sapping the moral fibre of the race in its endeavours towards cul¬
ture inasmuch as no race can advance without race pride. Such pride in the
analysis depends upon the motherhood of the nation, and upon the self-
confidence that can be engendered only by the mother in the home.




                      Charlotte Manye Maxeke,
        Social Conditions Among Bantu
               Women and Girls
                           South Africa 1930       English


Two outstanding achievements of Charlotte Manye Maxeke (1874-1939) define
her preeminent position in South African intellectual and cultural history in the
twentieth century: First, she was arguably the greatest black South African apos¬
tle of modernity in that country. Second, as such, she enabled the connections with
black culture across the Atlantic that made the construction of South African
modernity possible.
   Maxeke inherited her profound historical awareness from two brilliant teachers
at the Edward Memorial School in Uitenhage in the late nineteenth century, Isaac
Wauchope (1845-1930) and PaulXiniwe (1857-1910). They were part of a group of
Xhosa intellectuals who—through their articles and essays in John Tengo Jabavu’s
newspaper Imvo Zabantsundu in the 1880s and in the 1890s—grappled with the his¬
torical meaning of modernity’s violent entrance from Europe into Africa.
   Among the issues with which they concerned themselves were the uprooting of
Africans as labor-power from the villages and countryside into exploitative social
and economic relations in the new towns; the subversion of African ethos by the
new corrupt forces of prostitution and drinking; the complicity of Christianity, as
practiced and interpreted by white missionaries, with new forms of domination
and oppression; the fundamental importance of education; and the possible his¬
torical lessons to be learned from the United States.
   Maxeke’s presentation reprinted below, “Social Conditions Among Bantu
Women and Girls,” originally made to the Bantu-European Students’ Christian
Conference in Fort Hare in 1930 (and published by them), broaches these issues
of modernity from nearly fifty years earlier, but makes three unparalleled and rev¬
olutionary transformations: First, as a New African Woman, she views the issues
from the perspective of the woman question; second, her reading of the positive
and negative aspects of modernity inspire and radicalize her to call for political
unity across gender and racial barriers and differences; and third, she is historically
aware—as had not been the case before—that the end of African alienation is
inseparable from the restoration to the African people of lands taken from them
by the Europeans.
   In 1896, years before this breakthrough essay, Charlotte Manye attended
Wilberforce University in Ohio where she studied with W. E. B. DuBois, the New
Negro intellectual and great American man of letters. While still a student, she



             Social Conditions Among Bantu Women and Girls                     ♦   195
facilitated the link between New Negro modernity and New African modernity by
making Bishop Henry M. Turner (1834—1915), of the African Methodist
Episcopal Church in the United States, and Bishop Mangane Maake Mokone
(1851-1930), the founder of Ethiopianism, aware of each other’s historical proj¬
ects within the international context of black modernity.
   On her return to South Africa in 1901 (as the country’s first black woman grad¬
uate), Charlotte Manye became the foremost articulator of the historical principles
and ideology of the New African Woman. Not only may she have been present at
the founding of the African National Congress (ANC) in 1912, but—through her
Xhosa writings on the “woman question” in Umteteli wa Bantu in the 1920s       she
also became one of the leading members ot the New African Movement, which
had been launched by Pixley ka Isaka Seme’s 1903 essay, “The Regeneration of
Africa.” One of the earliest opponents of the system of passes for women, she
became the first president of the Bantu Women’s League (a forerunner to the
ANC Women’s League). She also founded with her husband, Marshall Maxeke,
the Wilberforce Institute at Kilnerton in the Transvaal and various other schools.
   Her greatness was easily apparent to other members of the New African
Movement who in various forms expressed admiration and gratitude for her con¬
tributions. In 1930, Alfred B. Xuma (1893-1962), who was to become president-
general of the ANC in the 1940s, published a booklet tabulating his appreciation
of her extraordinary talents, Charlotte Manye (Maxeke); or; What an Educated
African Girl Can Do. Maxeke belongs in many ways to the intellectual tradition to
which the great modern Zulu prose stylist Lydia Umkasetemba (see her text in this
volume) contributed in the mid-nineteenth century. Lor further details about
Maxeke’s life and career, see James T. Campbell, Songs of Zion (1998).
                                                                 Ntongela Masilela


                                        ♦

In speaking of Bantu women in urban areas, the first thing to be consid¬
ered is the Home, around which and in which the whole activity of family
life circulates. First of all, the Home is the residence of the family, and
home and family life are successful only where husband and wife live hap¬
pily together, bringing up their family in a sensible way, sharing the
responsibilities naturally involved in a fair and wholehearted spirit. The
woman, the wife, is the keystone of the household: she holds a position of
supreme importance, for is she not directly and intimately concerned with
the nurturing and upbringing of the children of the family, the future gen¬
eration? She is their first counsellor, and teacher; on her rests the respon¬
sibility of implanting in the flexible minds of her young, the right
principles and teachings of modern civilisation. Indeed, on her rests the
failure or success of her children when they go out into life. It is therefore
essential that the home atmosphere be right, that the mother be the real
“queen” of the home, the inspiration of her family, if her children are to go
out into the world equipped for the battles of life.
   There are many problems pressing in upon us Bantu, to disturb the
peaceful working of our homes. One of the chief is perhaps the stream of


196   4-   1920s TO 1950s
Native life into the towns. Men leave their homes, and go into big towns
like Johannesburg, where they get a glimpse of a life such as they had never
dreamed existed. At the end of their term of employment they receive the
wages for which they have worked hard, and which should be used for the
sustenance of their families, but the attractive luxuries of civilisation are in
many instances too much for them, they waste their hard earned wages, and
seem to forget completely the crying need of their family out in the veld.
  The wife finds that her husband has apparently forgotten her existence,
and she therefore makes her hard and weary way to the town in search of
him. When she gets there, and starts looking round for a house of some
sort in which to accommodate herself and her children, she meets with the
first rebuff. The Location Superintendent informs her that she cannot rent
accommodation unless she has a husband. Thus she is driven to the first
step on the downward path, for if she would have a roof to cover her chil¬
dren’s heads a husband must be found, and so we get these poor women
forced by circumstances to consort with men in order to provide shelter for
their families. Thus we see that the authorities in enforcing the restrictions
in regard to accommodation are often doing Bantu society a grievous
harm, for they are forcing its womanhood, its wedded womanhood, to the
first step on the downward path of sin and crime.
   Many Bantu women live in the cities at a great price, the price of their
children; for these women, even when they live with their husbands, are
forced in most cases to go out and work, to bring sufficient into the homes
to keep their children alive. The children of these unfortunate people
therefore run wild, and as there are not sufficient schools to house them, it
is easy for them to live an aimless existence, learning crime of all sorts in
their infancy almost.
   If these circumstances obtain when husband and wife live together in the
towns, imagine the case of the woman, whose husband has gone to town and
left her, forgetting apparently all his responsibilities. Here we get young
women, the flower of the youth of the Bantu, going up to towns in search of
their husbands, and as I have already stated, living as the reputed wives of
other men, because of the location requirements, or becoming housekeepers
to men in the locations and towns, and eventually their nominal wives.
   In Johannesburg, and other large towns, the male Natives are employed
to do domestic work, in the majority of instances, and a female domestic
servant is a rarity. We thus have a very dangerous environment existing for
any woman who goes into any kind of domestic service in these towns, and
naturally immorality of various kinds ensues, as the inevitable outcome of
this situation. Thus we see that the European is by his treatment of the
Native in these ways which I have mentioned, only pushing him further and
further down in the social scale, forgetting that it was he and his kind who
brought these conditions about in South Africa, forgetting his responsibil¬
ities to those who labour for him and to whom he introduced the benefits,
and evils, of civilisation. These facts do not sound very pleasant I know, but


            Social Conditions Among Bantu Women and Girls                ♦   197
this Conference is, according to my belief, intended to give us all the oppor¬
tunity of expressing our views, our problems, and ol discussing them in an
attitude of friendliness and fairmindedness, so that we may perhaps be
enabled to see some way out of them.
  Then we come to the Land Question. This is very acute in South Africa,
especially from the Bantu point of view. South Africa in terms of available
land is shrinking daily owing to increased population, and to many other
economic and climatic causes. Cattle diseases have crept into the country,
ruining many a stock farmer, and thus Bantu wealth is gradually decaying.
As a result there are more and more workers making their way to the towns
and cities such as Johannesburg to earn a living. And what a living! The
majority earn about £3 10s. per month, out of which they must pay 25s. for
rent, and 10s. for tram fares, so I leave you to imagine what sort of exis¬
tence they lead on the remainder.
   Here again we come back to the same old problem that I outlined
before, that of the woman of the home being obliged to find work in order
to supplement her husband’s wages, with the children growing up undisci¬
plined and uncared for, and the natural following rapid decay of morality
among the people. We find that in this state of affairs, the woman in
despair very often decides that she cannot leave her children thus uncared
for, and she therefore throws up her employment in order to care for them,
but is naturally forced into some form of home industry, which, as there is
very little choice for her in this direction, more often than not takes the
form of the brewing and selling of Skokiaan. Thus the woman starts on a
career of crime for herself and her children, a career which often takes her
and her children right down the depths of immorality and misery. The
woman, poor unfortunate victim of circumstances, goes to prison, and the
children are left even more desolate than when their mother left them to
earn her living. Again they are uncared for, undisciplined, no-one’s respon¬
sibility, the prey of the undesirables with whom their mother has come into
contact in her frantic endeavour to provide for them by selling skokiaan.
The children thus become decadent, never having 'had a chance in life.
About ten years ago, there was talk of Industrial schools being started for
such unfortunate children, but it was only talk, and we are to-day in the
same position, aggravated by the increased numbers steadily streaming in
from the rural areas, all undergoing very similar experiences to those I have
just outlined.
   I would suggest that there might be a conference of Native and
European women, where we could get to understand each others point of
view, each others difficulties and problems, and where, actuated by the real
spirit of love, we might find some basis on which we could work for the
common good of European and Bantu womanhood.
   Many of the Bantu feel'and rightly too that the laws of the land are not
made for Black and White alike. Take the question of permits for the right
to look for work. To look for work, mark you! The poor unfortunate Native,


198   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
fresh from the country does not know of these rules and regulations, natu¬
rally breaks them and is thrown into prison; or if he does happen to know
the regulations and obtains a pass for six days, and is obliged to renew it
several times, as is of course very often the case, he will find that when he
turns up tor the third or fourth time for the renewal of his permit, he is put
into prison, because he has been unsuccessful in obtaining work. And not
only do the Bantu feel that the law for the White and the Black is not sim¬
ilar, but we even find some of them convinced that there are two Gods, one
for the White and one for the Black. I had an instance of this in an old
Native woman who had suffered much, and could not be convinced that the
same God watched over and cared for us all, but felt that the God who gave
the Europeans their life of comparative comfort and ease, could not possi¬
bly be the same God who allowed his poor Bantu to suffer so. As another
instance of the inequalities existing in our social scheme, we have the fact
of Natives not being allowed to travel on buses and trams in many towns,
except those specially designed for them.
  In connection with the difficulty experienced through men being
employed almost exclusively in domestic work in the cities, I would mention
that this is of course one of the chief reasons for young women, who should
rightly be doing that work, going rapidly down in the social life of the com¬
munity; and it is here that joint service councils of Bantu and White women
would be able to do so much for the good of the community. The solution
to the problem seems to me to be to get the women into service, and to give
them proper accommodation, where they know they are safe. Provide hos¬
tels, and club-rooms, and rest rooms for these domestic servants, where they
may spend their leisure hours, and I think you will find the problem of the
employment of female domestic servants will solve itself, and that a better
and happier condition of life will come into being for the Bantu.
  If you definitely and earnestly set out to lift women and children up in
the social life of the Bantu, you will find the men will benefit, and thus the
whole community, both White and Black. Johannesburg is, to my knowl¬
edge, a great example of endeavour for the uplift of the Bantu woman, but
we must put all our energies into this task if we would succeed. What we
want is more co-operation and friendship between the two races, and more
definite display of real Christianity to help us in the solving of these rid¬
dles. Let us try to make our Christianity practical.
   The Native mind in many instances does not understand Christianity,
because with the teaching of Christ, and the coming of civilisation, come
also so many of the troubles from which the Bantu is to-day suffering, and
from which he never suffered before, while he sees the White man appar¬
ently happy and comfortable. As an instance of this let me tell you of an old
chief, whom I had tried again and again to convert. One day I went to him,
and suggested that he was getting old, and that it was high time he was con¬
verted, and what do you think he said. He said, “Who is this man who was
killed, and why does he cause us so much trouble? We had nothing to do


            Social Conditions Among Bantu Women and Girls              ♦   199
with killing him, why come to me about him? Go to the people who did kill
him, and show them what they have done—go to the Jews, and tell them
what a lot of trouble they are bringing upon us all.” Eventually, he said that
he did not want to be converted and to go and live in another heaven to that
in which his ancestors were, where he would be lonely. Thus we see the view
the old-fashioned Bantu mind takes of Christianity to-day.
   In conclusion let me repeat that what we want really, at this stage in our
existence, is friendly and Christian co-operation between the Bantu and
White women particularly, and also of the whole communities of Bantu
and White, to help us solve these problems, which can be solved if they are
tackled in the spirit of Christianity and fair-mindedness.




                     Nosente of the Umgqvoashe,
                    The Story of Nosente
                          South Africa c. 1930     isiXhosa


This text is a product of an oral exchange held in the 1930s between a woman
identified as Nosente, and Monica Hunter, a white South African social anthro¬
pologist widely respected for her research into the social practices of the amaXhosa
people of the Eastern Cape. Nosente’s story offers a rare and rich first-person
account of the processes of courtship and marriage within the context of ancestral
religious practices, values, and rituals.
   Nosente was born in Nyara in the Transkei, in the Umgqwashe clan of the
Gcaleka House of the amaXhosa in the 1860s. Her family was among those reset¬
tled by the British in a small reserve in the Ciskei after the Xhosa defeat in the
Ngcayecibe War of 1877. This war, like earlier wars, was about land. The Gcaleka
paramount chief Sarhili, also known as Kreli, had thrown his full force against the
invading colonial army, but with the massive technological superiority of the
British, half of his soldiers were killed and the rest resettled across the Kei River.
   The story in the text contrasts with the Christianity to which Nosente and her
family were later converted. It also powerfully depicts the changes that resulted
from the Xhosa people’s involvement in the cash-based capitalist economy.
Introduced by Europeans, this change affected and framed some of Nosente’s
experiences of the conflict between her immediate reality and the forces of transi¬
tion. It is significant that the story is narrated to a white South African women
with good credentials in the field of researching amaXhosa social practices. Hunter
translates Nosente’s Xhosa into colloquial English, and at times uses literal trans¬
lation in order to retain the original metaphor. She sometimes adds explanatory
notes of her own indicated in square brackets, which we have left in this reprint¬
ing in order to emphasize the mediated nature of the text.
   The text conveys the sense that this is a woman talking to somebody who is out
of her cosmology and therefore does not understand the intricacies of the rites of
passage contained in Xhosa cultural practices. Nosente explains the process of the
exchange of gifts, for example, which is critical to the formation of a relationship
with her in-laws. She also gives a detailed account of the values associated with

200   ♦   1920s to 1950s
hard work, the notion of respect, processes ol punishment rituals, harvesting and
food sharing rituals, purification of pregnant women, protection rituals for chil¬
dren, and hlonipha, the practice ol linguistic avoidance characteristic of Xhosa
patriarchy. Virtually all the information ottered here is informative to an outside
audience in a way that it is not to a local audience. Ritual has a prominence in
Nosente’s psyche trom the perspective of the outsider rather than from her own.
Her narrative is full of movement, yet depicts a woman drifting in a sea of change
while constrained by values and systems she cannot shake off.
   Paradoxically, while envying the recent freedom for the new generation, she
simultaneously laments the loss of the “lightness” and security of the past. Perhaps
this is a universal paradox: While we anticipate the gains of the future, we also
mourn with nostalgia the loss of tradition and the completeness of the family. Yet
Nosente’s description of the hardship caused by the disintegration of her immedi¬
ate family is placed alongside the political transition in a way that allows an insight
into the very specific suffering that South African social change has caused.
                                                                    Nomfundo Walaza


                                          ♦

When I was at Middledrift [in the Ciskei] I was seen. In those days young
men when they wished to marry travelled about the country, looking at the
girls. One young man saw me, and he sent messages to my father asking
that he might marry me. My father called his brothers, and they talked
with the messengers. They talked about the cattle that that man should
give to my father. After a time we saw strange cattle in the cattle-fold. We
were told that they had been sent to graze in this country, and that my
father was looking after them. I had never seen that man. I did not know
that I was to be married until one day people said, “You will go to be mar¬
ried today.” [This is by no means a universal Xhosa custom. Most fre¬
quently the man has spoken to the girl before he approaches her parents.]
   I was afraid, but I could not help myself. It was the decision of the eld¬
ers. I was a very ignorant girl then. All the time since those men had first
talked with my father, the old people of the kraal had been getting baskets,
and mats, and blankets. They asked for baskets from my mother’s brothers.
My father sold a goat, and bought other baskets and mats from those who
make them, and he bought blankets, and a hoe from the store. But I did
not see any of these things. The old people did not tell me that I should be
married lest I should run away.
  Seven cattle were brought to my father before I was taken to be married.
Word was sent to the home of that man to tell them that the bridal party
would arrive on a certain day. My sisters from the kraal [father’s brothers’
daughters] accompanied me, and a sister of my father who was a widow,
and another who was divorced, and two men, adherents of my father, to
whom he had lent cattle. The other girls and my father’s sisters were all
carrying baskets, and mats, and new blankets. We went on foot. At dusk
we arrived at that kraal. We sat down behind the huts. After we had sat a


                                                 The Story of Nosente          *   201
young man came to ask us for what we had come. The men replied that we
were strangers travelling, and that we sought a place to sleep. We were
given a hut swept and freshly smeared. When we came to that kraal the
people pointed out my husband to me, saying, “That one is your husband.
A goat was brought and killed, “to bring us off the mountains” [i.e. to wel¬
come them]. Half the goat we cooked, and we ate in our hut. The other
half was left to the people of the kraal.
  The next day I went early to the river with my father’s sisters and the
other girls. There we washed, and rubbed ourselves freshly with fat, and
with red ochre, and my father’s sister put on me the new long skirt which
she had brought, and many bead ornaments. The other girls also were
dressed in long skirts. [Married women wear skirts to the ankle, unmarried
girls, skirts to the knee.] We were given handkerchiefs for our heads, and
were warned that none of us should go uncovered, for we must show
respect in this kraal as brides.
   In the cattle-fold men killed an ox. Meat was brought to us, and I was
given to eat first. Many people came to feast. Men and women danced the
umdudo [wedding dance]. In the afternoon I was taken to “walk in the court¬
yard.” I stood with my sisters before the men of the kraal. My father’s sisters
took the blankets off our breasts, and we stood that the men might see us.
Then I was given a spear, and told to throw it in the kraal. The women of
the kraal were running to and fro shouting, “Here people plough, here peo¬
ple weed, here people grind, here people draw water, here people are dili¬
gent.” After I had thrown the spear, I went with my sisters to draw water and
collect firewood. We left the wood and water outside the great hut. At the
same time the men from my home were giving presents from the goods they
had brought to the parents of my husband and to his sisters.
  The next day the people from my home went away. Before they left they
exhorted me saying that I should be diligent and humble in this kraal, that
I should cook for all the people of the kraal, and behave myself seemly, so
that when they came they should hear no evil of me. My husband’s people
gave me a new name, calling me Nosente, the Mbther of Compassion,
because they avoided the name by which I was called at home. I do not know
why they said Mother of Compassion. They called me what they liked. [. . .]
  When I was a bride I had to be very diligent, and respectful to all the
people of my husband’s home. I got up very early in the morning, and
cleared the ashes from the fire, and went to fetch water. Every day I went
to gather firewood, and wild green plants for food. I ground meal for por¬
ridge and beer, and cooked and swept, and smeared the floors with cow-
dung. Only I could not sweep or smear the back part of the great hut, for
the back part of the hut is the men’s part, and it was the hut of my hus¬
band’s elder brother. In my own hut I could go all over. I could not go near
the cattle-fold, or cross Mae courtyard between it and the huts. Even at
night we must not cross the courtyard, and if a wife goes out she must
cover her head, for, it is said, the ancestors [i.e. ancestral spirits] of her


202   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
husband are there. When a bride goes from one hut to another she makes
a wide circle round the back of the huts, that she may be far from the
courtyard and the cattle-fold.
  I could not call the names of my husband’s elder brothers, or of his
father, who was dead. I could not say words like their names. A bride when
she first comes does not speak much. She listens to the other women talk¬
ing and hears what they call things. All the women in the kraal should
avoid those words which wives may not use, for if a daughter of the kraal
call her brother’s name [as she is entitled to do] then a bride may hear, and
call what she should not call. When she makes mistakes her husband’s
mother and sisters reprove her, and tell her what she must say. Sometimes
if a bride does not behave nicely, and neglects to do the things which she
should do at her husband’s home, it is said to her, “You call your husband’s
father’s name,” and then she must go back to her own father and get gifts
to bring back to her husband’s home, to “wash” with. She may bring a goat,
and it is killed, and the people of the kraal eat it. But her people tell her
that she has done wrong, and that she must not act in such a way again.
   I could not eat milk food in my husband’s kraal when I was first mar¬
ried. Then one day a beast was killed, that I might eat. My husband’s
younger brother handed me sour milk, and meat of the beast which had
been killed. I ate them together. After that I could eat the thick milk of my
husband’s cows.
  Each wife living at my husband’s home had her own field, but we
worked together in the fields. People were beginning to use ploughs drawn
by oxen then, and the men ploughed the fields. We women weeded with
hoes we bought from Europeans. When the weeds were many we took mil¬
let, and soaked it in water until it sprouted, then ground it with more mil¬
let, and made beer. People saw the smoke when we were cooking the beer,
and we told them that we were going to weed such and such a field, with
beer, on a certain day. They came with us to the field at sunrise, bringing
their hoes, and many people hoed our field. We sang the hoeing song. We
carried some beer to the field in baskets, and clay pots, and people drank.
Then when the sun was hot they left their work and came to drink at our
kraal. We too went to hoe the fields of other people and to drink their beer.
   At harvest the grain was brought home, and stored in pits dug in the
cattle-pen. The grain was put in, and a stone put over the mouth of the pit,
and the mouth was sealed with dung, then the cattle trampled upon it and
hid it. Each wife had her own pit. Each in turn cooked food from her field,
and all the people of the kraal ate together. I cooked tonight, and my hus¬
band’s brother’s wife cooked tomorrow.
   In autumn we repaired our huts, cutting grass, and repairing the thatch,
and replastering the walls. When we came to this country after the war we
saw people making huts with mud walls and grass roofs. People said, “Look,
there are good huts!” and we made them also. The old huts with grass walls
were low and caught alight very easily, then people sleeping in them, men,


                                            The Story of Nosente      *   203
women and children, were burned. When there was much work to do thatch¬
ing and plastering, we sometimes made a little beer and called our friends, the
women who lived near, to help us with the work, then afterwards we drank
the beer. The men came to drink also although they had not worked.
  Now people make square houses with iron roofs.
  After I had been married a short time I became pregnant. I told the wife
of my husband’s brother. She showed me the plant which I should put in a
pot of water. Every day I drank of that water. [A pregnant woman drinks
an infusion of a plant as a laxative. Different families use different plants.
A woman must always use that of her husband’s family.] Every day I still
went to draw water and fetch wood, and I worked in the fields. When
labour pains began I went to my hut. The women of the kraal came to me.
Then when they saw that the child did not come they sent a boy to call
Nomanga, whom people said was skilled as a midwife. After she came the
child was born. I took it and washed it. Next morning early I put some
leaves of the tree isifuto on the fire at the back of the hut. After washing
the child I swung it in the smoke of the fire, singing as I did so,


                Hots hi! Hots hi!
                Lomtana akule,
                Abemdala apike into azaziyo.


                [Hotshi! Hotshi!
                May this child grow.
                When it is old may it deny the thing it knows.]


This I did every morning and every evening for a month, that the child
might grow strong. I called the child uPote, the twisted one, because he
was born with heavy labour. [. . .]
  All my children went to school. UPote passed Standard VI, and his
teachers said that he should go on and become a teacher, but he did not
like to do that, and he ran away and went to work in Port Elizabeth. All
the others passed Standard V or VI. My daughter died in the influenza
epidemic in 1918. My husband also died. UPote, who was working in Port
Elizabeth, died there. Another son went to work in Johannesburg and died
there. Another went to work in Cape Town and died there. Two are here
at home. The elder is not working for Europeans. The younger goes to
work in East London for a time, and then comes home.
  The elder one living at home is married to a girl from Gqumahashe.
When she was brought by her people a goat was killed, “to bring them off
the mountain.” The next day an ox was killed for the feast, and she was mar¬
ried in church. Before they went away her people gave her advice, saying
that she should show respect to her husband’s home and conduct herself
humbly; that she should cook, that when guests arrived in the kraal she
should give them food, and that there should be no one in the kraal to


204   >   1920s TO 1950s
whom she did not give food; that she should no longer go about with young
people, but with old people, that she might learn their manners; that when
she laughed she should not raise her voice loudly, but that she should laugh
softly out of respect. We of the kraal also gave her advice telling her these
same things. Then the men of her home presented the gifts they had
brought to us, the people of the kraal. They had brought dresses, and
shawls, and dishes, and such things.
  Now since we are “school people” my daughter-in-law does not avoid
parts of the hut, and the courtyard, as I did when I was a bride. She does not
call the name of my husband, or of my sons older than her husband, or words
like them, but she may write the surname of the family when she writes a
letter to her husband. School people do not kill that the bride may eat the
milk of the kraal. I gave sour milk to my son’s wife, and after that she drank
it. She lives in my hut and cooks with me, but she has her own hut to which
she goes with her husband at night. She has four children. Now when chil¬
dren are born all the old customs are not followed by school people. Men
may enter the hut of the mother of a newborn child before she comes out,
but some still do not like to enter. School people do not kill a goat just when
the mother comes out of the hut, but the baby is baptized in church, and on
that day a baptism dinner is made and a goat is killed for the feast. At the
baptism dinner of the eldest child the top tier of the parents’ wedding cake
which they have kept as their “proof” [i.e. proof of a legal marriage] is eaten.
  My daughter-in-law and I work in the fields. I weed much. For a time I
worked in the kitchen for Europeans. Now I wash and iron. My daughter-
in-law is also hired to sew for Europeans. [. . .]
   The difference between life now, and life when I was young, is that now
there are poverty, and sorrows. When I was young nothing troubled me.
Now the difference is great. Now children do not live with their parents as
they used to do. They are scattered. Only two or three children are with
their parents. The mother wonders how the others are. She wonders
whether they are ill or what. There is heaviness. Children no longer hon¬
our their parents as they used to do. Times have changed.

                                   Transcribed and translated by Monica Hunter




    Victoria Nombulelo M. Swaartbooi, UMANDISA
                          South Africa 1934      isiXhosa


Victoria Nombulelo M. Swaartbooi was born in the Ngqamakhwe district in the
Eastern Cape in 1907 and died in 1937. Swaartbooi is a common surname among
coloured families from the eighteenth century onwards. (Swart is Dutch or Afrikaans
for black; the etymology of boot is highly contested.) Her novel, UMandisa (the title
is Xhosa for “the bringer of joy”), has autobiographical echoes. Like her protagonist


                                                               UMandisa      ♦   205
Mandisa, Swaartbooi studied at Mgwali Training School in 1924, and in 1926 pro¬
ceeded to Healdtown School near Fort Beaufort for her Junior Teacher’s Certificate.
Both schools were prestigious missionary institutions. Swaartbooi taught domestic
science at the Girls’ Practising School at Mgwali in the Eastern Cape from 1929. Her
parents were Christians and her father was a principal of the Methodist School at
which she was a pupil.
   UMandisa, published in 1934 and only fifty pages long, is the second extant
novel written by a Xhosa woman. The earliest were Lillith Kakaza’s Intyantyambo
Yomzi (1913) and UThandiwe wakwaGcaleka (1914), though the former cannot be
traced. Like UThandiwe wakwaGcaleka, UMandisa focuses on the development of
a young girl into womanhood, and targets the adolescent age group in its didactic
intention. In a preface Swaartbooi states that she wrote the novel to illustrate the
joy of serving people by being educated. Written in simple language, the novel uses
songs, poems, word games, and folk tales to project an orderly Xhosa world with a
distinctively regional cultural flavor.
   Mandisa represents the emergence of a new type of woman: The last chapter
closes not with marriage, but with Mandisa’s popularity as a teacher, and her suc¬
cess as an independent woman who has become the provider within her home.
Moreover, whereas storytellers were usually older women who could give moral
guidance to the younger generations, the relatively young Mandisa is positioned as
the storyteller, thus usurping the usual position of older women. On the other
hand, the theme of Mandisa’s first tale affirms the centrality of males and the self-
sacrifice of women to bolster that centrality. It also confirms the power of a woman
who single-handedly enables her brother to become a man. Overall, however, the
novel advocates the independence of young, educated women whose pride is in the
uplift of their family, community, and country. Swaartbooi evinces a vaguely liberal
feminist consciousness by representing young men and women in a moment of
shared nationalism as they sing “Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika” (God Bless Africa), the
hymn that would in 1994 be adopted universally as the South African national
anthem. Significantly, she envisions women’s equality with men as part of an
African tradition, and as necessary if black Africa is to be “brought back.”
                                                                   V. M. Sisi Maqagi




The week after Mandisa heard the news that she had passed, she wrote
many letters of application for a teaching post to the ministers in various
places. She stated her experience and qualifications.
   Two weeks went by but no responses came. Then one day she returned
from the shop with many letters which had arrived that morning. On
opening them she found that they were replies to the letters she had writ¬
ten. She read the first one and found a rejection, and the second, third and
fourth. She opened the fifth and last one from the resident minister at
Ngxakaxha. He wanted her to start teaching in a school at Colosa, hoping
to interview her on the '^Thursday of the following week, before schools
reopened on the Monday after. It was Thursday when she received the let¬
ters, so Mandisa had a whole week in which to prepare herself. She was
accompanied by Mbulelo, her brother, to the minister’s residence at

206   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
Ngxakaxha. The minister and Mandisa reached an agreement, and he told
Mandisa which class she was going to teach, after which Mandisa and her
brother returned home where they were awaited.
  Mandisa was to lodge with a family, since her home Zagwityi was too
far from Colosa for her to stay there. Arrangements for her lodgings were
made with Bekaphi, the headman of Colosa, who also had children at a
seminary school. Bekaphi and his wife agreed to take her in. His letter of
acceptance came on Friday, just before her departure on Saturday. It was a
very hot Saturday when Mandisa and her father took a train to Ngxakaxha
station, and from there they set out to Colosa on horseback. They had bor¬
rowed these horses from a friend of Mandisa’s father who lived in town in
Ngxakaxha. They arrived at Bekaphi’s home at dusk and were warmly wel¬
comed. The head of the family knew Nonkululeko, her father, very well.
The houses of their fathers had been adjacent when they were young. The
old men and women of the home were engaged in conversation deep into
the night, and Mandisa kept up a lively conversation with the girls of the
house.
  It so happened that Bekaphi’s eldest daughter was going to teach at the
same school as Mandisa. She was going to teach a Sub B class, while
Mandisa was going to take the beginners. The name of this girl was Rietta
Nomathemba Bekaphi, she had trained in Healdtown. Mandisa and her
friend gave themselves time to prepare their lessons.
   On Monday morning Mandisa’s father left for home as his daughter and
Nomathemba prepared themselves for school. This time Mandisa did not
cry when parting from her father. They went to school and there was great
excitement among the       children who     admired their new teachers.
Nomathemba at least was already known to them; so you can imagine who
was the centre of all that gaze. There were fifty children in all who came to
be taught by Mandisa, and thirty-nine for Nomathemba.
   Within two weeks of the assumption of her work, Mandisa felt quite
exhausted from the strain of teaching. Worse was the exhaustion brought
about by long hours of standing, and exhausting too were her powers of
counselling those many little cases brought to her by the little ones, reports
about those who had lost or broken other children’s pencils and slates, and
those who looked at words which did not belong to them. She had to pacify
all who came to report to her, and bring about reconciliation. In about two
months she got used to standing.
  One day as she and Nomathemba were on their way home after school,
Nomathemba remarked, “I feel so tired today, Mandi!        I sympathise with
you, Thembi, my friend. Last week I felt the same. That was Mandisa s
reply, to which she added, “What would I have done had I known that
teaching was so hard? Truly, I always thought this work was so easy, this
teaching, and I looked at the teachers and thought to myself they were hav¬
ing a lot of fun, working in a sheltered environment away from the sun! Now
I see how ignorant I must have been.’

                                                         UMandisa      ♦   207
  “My father’s child leave that alone. I also had exactly the same
thoughts,” said Nomathemba.
   Thus did Mandisa and Nomathemba continue to think about and dis¬
cuss the problems they encountered in teaching. They finally got used to
the tribulations of a teacher. Actually, the hardships of the teaching pro¬
fession are likened to the woes of a married woman. These young women
went about their duties diligently, doing an excellent job of teaching and
training the children, the little boys and girls. Mandisa was quite happy in
the headman’s house. [. . .]
   The little children loved Mandisa very much, because she delighted them.
  I shall narrate only two of the many folktales Mandisa used to tell on
cold days, when the children at school were few, making them enjoy
school. Here is the first one:

Usikhulum’kathethi [He-who-talks-but-does-not-talk]
A certain chief had many children. One day a dumb child was born. This
child was greatly loved by his father and mother. If you happened to find
them playing with him, you would think he could speak. They gave him the
name Usikhulum’kathethi [He-who-talks-but-does-not-talk]. This child
grew up and became a big boy. When the time came for the boys to be cir¬
cumcised, a miracle occurred, for Usikhulum’kathethi started to speak and
said to his sister, “I’ll go to circumcision, my sister, only when I have a blan¬
ket made from the skin of iNwabulele” [a mythical animal of the deep].
Shocked, his sister could not answer at once. When his father and mother
heard this, they were very glad. That very day messengers were sent to invite
people to a big feast to mark the day when the chief’s son was able to speak.
But Usikhulum’kathethi’s sister thought about what her brother had told her.
   The following morning his sister baked many loaves of bread and put
them in a basket. She then left carrying these on her head. When she arrived
at the first deep pool of the river, she sang the following song: “Nwabulele,
Nwabulele, come out and eat me up, come out and eat me up.” All was quiet
on the surface of the pool. She moved on to the next'one and sang the same
song, but there was no movement of any kind even there. And so she went
from pool to pool until many pools were passed. At last, when she was about
to give up, she reached a huge pool, and after her song the water began to
stir, and she stood ready to throw one of her loaves of bread as soon as
iNwabulele appeared. When it finally came up she threw all her loaves of
bread at it. As soon as it ate them it died because she had put poison in
them. Then she went to report to the people, and they came and skinned it,
and a blanket was made for her brother. So then he went to circumcision.
  As a young man he married a chief’s daughter and grew up to be a wise man.


   [. . .] Readers, let me ndw conclude the story of this girl. She is still teach¬
ing and doing very well, and receives praises from everyone. She succeeded in
helping her brother Mbulelo through school, and now he too is a teacher at


208   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
Tshembeyi near Queenstown. Now she is seeing Ndyebo through his educa¬
tion and he is doing higher education at Fort Hare. Mbulelo is helping
Nosipho through school, and he has sent her to Healdtown. Only last month,
Mandisa sent Ndyebo some new black shoes. Ndyebo was at a loss how to
thank her and wrote saying, “My sister, eldest daughter of my home, thank
you very much, only a witch fights against growth! I am fortunate to be born
with such a sensible person. Do what you do today again tomorrow, Dlamini.
I thank you for what you have done for me. One day when I am myself an
adult, I will show you my gratitude. I am full of appreciation for you.”
   Nobantu, the last born in Mandisa’s home, is soon going to take her first
year at the seminary. I hope the young women who happen to read this
story will want to behave like the young woman we have read about here.
Perhaps they will do even more, will go out into the world and spread the
light confirming the last words of our Lord, “Go and make followers of all
the nations, teaching them everything about which I gave instruction. I
will be with you at all times to the end of this world.”
   For black Africa to be brought back, the black women of our country
will go out together with the black men; then we will begin to say,
“Mayibuye iAfrika!” Go on, go on great lady, to make the steps which we
are already eager to follow.
   “Daughters of Africa, play your role in bringing back and developing
Africa, the land of our birth.”
  After each one of us has played her role and not just folded her hands,
we can then say, “Nkosi sikelel’ iAfrika, maluphakame uphondo lwayo!”
[God bless Africa, let her horn be raised!]

                         Translated by Abner Nyamende with V. M. Sisi Maqagi




       Unangoroa Maherero, Louisa Kambazembi,
        Edla Maherero, Augusta Kambazembi,
        Magdalina Katjimune, and Hester Keha,
           Nation Is Going to Ruination
                           Namibia 1936     otjiHerero


The Herero expected that their ancestral lands, expropriated by the Germans dur¬
ing the devastating German-Herero War of 1904-1907, would be restored to them
after the occupation of Namibia by South African troops in 1915. The South
Africans responded by establishing “Native Reserves” in central Namibia, which
temporarily met the political and economic aspirations of the Herero but also cre¬
ated a pool of cheap labor for mines and farms. The dissolution of tradition that
resulted when the men, and increasing numbers of all young people, were forced to
find employment outside of the reserves had severe consequences for the status
and prestige of women.

                                     Nation Is Going to Ruination          ♦   209
    On 17 October 1936 a deputation of about sixty Herero women presented and
read two letters to the superintendent of the Waterberg East Native Reserve. Six
influential women from prominent families led the group. They spoke on behalf of
their community, men and women. These texts—a letter, a speech, and a tran¬
scribed interview—mark the confident entry of women into the public discourse
of Herero nationalism that emerged during the 1920s and 1930s. The women
scandalized the colonial officials who attempted to neutralize and silence them.
The officials perceived a potential for general destabilization if women were to
continue to appropriate the role of speaking subject.
    These forceful texts of protest, which survive only in translation in colonial doc¬
uments, demand relief from the problems of increasing alcohol abuse, illegitimacy,
and promiscuity, as the women felt themselves responsible as custodians of the fam¬
ily for the well-being of the community. These symptoms of social disintegration
also eroded women’s sources of power and control. The demands indicate a conscious
perception that the increasing gender imbalances created in the reserves were a major
reason for social conflict. The women make it clear that, “in the earlier days,” boys
and girls faced equal community sanction for producing illegitimate children.
    In a subsequent meeting Louisa Kambazembi, Augusta Kambazembi, and
Magdalina Katjimune pressed their demand for “a proper doctor that can locate
the poison.” The Herero men who were present supported the women who diag¬
nosed what was affecting the “nation” and specified the cure. It is clear from the
correspondence surrounding the documents that the colonial officials did not find
the women’s demands unacceptable in themselves. What caused their response was
that the women asserted so uncompromisingly their right to speak, not only for
themselves, but also for their “nation”—a realm of discourse colonial administra¬
tors perceived as exclusively male.
                                                                       Margie Orford


                                          ♦


Meeting of Herero Native Women: W. E. N. Reserve
   On the 17th of October 1936, a deputation of approximately 60 Herero
women came to my office headed by native women Unangoroa Maherero,
Louise Kambazembi, Edla Maherero, Augusta Kafnbazembi, Magdalina
Katjimune and Hester Keha. They produced and read a letter the follow¬
ing of which is a translation.


The first thing is that we wish to call the “Biggest[”] doctor to come and
find out the persons who poison us, a doctor that can locate poison.
   The second point is, that the men should marry—all men from 30 years
of age and who are still single should be forced to get married—single men
who have reached that age and refuse to get married should be taxed. A
Bachelor Tax of £1 per month should be brought into force to serve as a
remembrance for them to marry.
   The third point: The rhen living and cohabiting with women to whom
they are not married and refuse to marry, the parents or relatives must take
the woman away from the man within three or four days.


210   ♦   1920s to 1950s
  The fourth point: The man responsible for a pregnant woman should be
forced to marry the woman, if he refuses, he should be made to pay three
cows and calves to the woman.
  The fifth point: Beer should not be allowed, the man who drinks beer
must go to the white peoples country and drink there but not in the reserve.
   The sixth: Young boys and girls must not associate with each other—
this must stop.
  These things that we have written God and the law must help us.
Nation is going to ruination.
  I am,
     Unangoroa Maherero, Louisa Kambazembi, Edla Maherero, Augusta
                      Kambazembi, Magdalina Katjimune &c Hester Keha.

Second Letter
Okakarara,
16 October 1936


We come to tell the Superintendent that the law and habits that God has
given to us [and] our grandparents is that each man lived with his brother
and family and looked after their children, sons and daughters until they
married. There was not one that got illegitimate child, only after marriage
did they have children. Out of every hundred women, there are only two
that have no children. Young girls who became pregnant before marriage
were looked upon with disgust by their parents and family.
  The man’s parents also looked upon him with disgust. He is also told to
marry the girl.
  In the earlier days people lived up to 70, 80 or 100 years.
  If a person is 2 years old or 60 years old and becomes ill, a witchdoctor
is called in to diagnose the case and if he discovers that some person has
“bewitched” the patient, that person is caught and given a good thrashing
and he is called upon to assist the patient until he recovers.
  This old custom of ours is now abolished since the time the Germans cap¬
tured us up to the present it has been stopped. We have seen many bad deaths.
   When a person dies today it takes only a few minutes before the body
falls to pieces and this thing which happens so soon after death is a new
thing to us and has been introduced by the White people by bringing into
this country other native people.
   We now wish for a good proper Doctor, so that we can call all the peo¬
ple together and discover what people have poison in their bodies and who
“bewitched” the other people.
  We wish to have a “Black Doctor” and not a white man Doctor.


Questioned by W.O.
   We wish to have a qualified native doctor trained according to the
European customs.


                                   Nation Is Going to Ruination       ♦   211
   Informed that according to my knowledge there are no qualified Herero
doctors, but that there are Zulu’s and coloured men who are qualified med¬
ical practitioners.
Answer:       We want any one of these people to investigate the presence of
              poison amongst our people.
Question-.    Can you give me the name of any person practicing as a witch¬
              doctor in this reserve.
Answer:       There is one Elekem Ganjone who we suspect of witchcraft.
By W. O.:     Do you know that the case in which Elekem was suspected
              was investigated by the District Surgeon and that a post¬
              mortem examination was held and nothing disclosed.
Answer:       We have heard.
Question:     Is it your wish that the Government should be requested to
              expel Elekem Ganjone from this reserve, seeing that you peo¬
              ple suspect him of witchcraft.
Answer:       No there are no eye-witnesses; we do not wish it.
Question:     In the event of an un-married woman who has given birth to
              an illegitimate child refuses to marry the responsible man—
              what will be your attitude then?
Answer:       The man must pay in any case.
Question:     You say a Bachelor Tax of £1 per month must be enforced on
              all un-married men from 30 years to 60 years. Supposing the
              party concerned does not earn more than 10/— per month,
              what do you propose doing then.
Answer:       He must pay or leave the Reserve we don’t want him here.


                                               Transcriber and translator unknown




                             Paulina Dlamini,
          Flight of the Royal Household
                           South Africa 1939       isiZulu


Paulina Nomguqo Dlamini’s lineage is distinguished: On her father’s side she was
related to the royal Swazi house and, on her mother’s, to Mzilikazi, founder of the
Ndebele kingdom in present-day Zimbabwe. In 1872, aged about fourteen,
Nomguqo was presented to the future Zulu king Cetshwayo to become a member
of his isigodlo, the women in the king’s household whose functions ranged from
domestic work to concubinage.
   Nomguqo (the Kneeling One) is the name her father gave her; on her conversion
to Christianity she chose Paulina. In the first half of her narrative, she witnesses the
Zulus’ acceptance of Cetshwayo as successor to Mpande; the proclamation of his
kingship byTheophilus Shepstone (Somsewu), the secretary for native affairs in the
Natal Government; the outbreak of the Anglo-Zulu War of 1879; the isigodlo


212   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
women’s flight with the royal wives, children, and cattle after Cetshwayo’s army was
defeated; and their hiding in caves for almost a year during the civil war that followed.
   Dlamini’s intimate knowledge of Cetshwayo’s domestic life makes her narrative
an important and rare document. In recounting how she helped the royal children to
safety with Zibhebhu, one of Cetshwayo’s senior generals and chiefs, Dlamini indi¬
cates her suspicions that she and the other young women would be forced to remain
with Zibhebhu. Her distrust of the man seems to have been warranted, for, after
Cetshwayo’s restoration as king, Zibhebhu, who had been appointed by the British
as one of the thirteen ruling chiefs in Zululand, led the faction that rose against
Cetshwayo. Dlamini attributes the ensuing civil war, during which Cetshwayo died,
to jealousy on the part of his half brother, Hamu, but some historians believe the
rivalry was orchestrated by British interests. Its consequences effectively destroyed
Zulu sovereignty.
   After her conversion to Christianity and when she was working as a missionary
in Zululand, Dlamini told her story to a German Lutheran missionary, Rev.
Heinrich Filter. In her account of daily life in the royal household, it is evident
that, while she wanted to give an honest picture, she found it difficult to admit to
her participation in some of their “heathen” practices. Being interviewed by a male
missionary colleague might well have increased this tension and produced some of
the complex self-censorship evident in her narrative. But at least she was able to
tell her story to Filter, whom she addresses as Baba Mhlahlela, in Zulu.
   He interviewed Dlamini on different occasions from about 1925 until 1939; she
died in 1942. Filter took longhand notes of her recollections in Zulu and then
translated them into German, intending to publish the narrative he was putting
together as a mission brochure. This seems not to have happened and after his
death his papers were given by his widow to S. Bourquin who translated the story
into English and edited it for publication in 1986. (The endnotes and bracketed
words in the text that follows are his. Words in double brackets have been added
by the current editors.) Dlamini’s narrative shows the impact of extensive media¬
tion—two European languages and cultures overlay the original—but a distinctive
voice remains. It conveys, from a point of view that has not previously been heard,
a young Zulu woman’s experience of major national events, the complexity of
which remains well within her comprehension.
                                                                         M. J. Daymond


                                            ♦

I was still at Ondini when preparations for war were made. The British
were kindling a war which Cetshwayo did not want. When he realised that
the British were determined to make war, he set about mobilising [phakela]
his own army. He assembled his regiments and ordered his medicine-men
to “doctor” them and treat them with protective and potent medicines. An
ox, which had been doctored by the medicine-men, was killed. Without
skinning it, it was cut up into strips. These strips of meat were thrown into
the air and had to be caught by the soldiers, who sucked at them, spat out
without swallowing, and passed the strips to the next men. Alter this rit¬
ual all the warriors had to take an emetic and then they were fortified by
being sprinkled with protective medicines.

                                      Flight of the Royal Household              ♦   213
  The war began with the battle of Isandlwana.1 As soon as Cetshwayo was
apprised by his messengers that battle had been joined, he took his seat on
the magic coil, the inkatha, holding the crescent-shaped nhlendla in his
hand. He did this to ensure that his warriors would fight with unity of
purpose, that they should not waver, and that victory would be theirs. It was
generally believed that if the king was sitting on the inkatha the influence of
his personality would reach out to his people ensuring the unity of the
nation. His mothers urged him not to get up from the magic coil to go to
the cattle-kraal. They maintained that if he did, the battle could not possi¬
bly end in his favour.
   Fleet-footed messengers kept coming in with hurried reports about the
progress of battle. When the king heard that his regiments were heading
towards victory, he began to leave his seat on the inkatha every now and
then. But the mothers scolded him on that account. In the end it did not
help much; the warriors returned from battle carrying the fury of war on
their backs. They were covered in blood and had tied up their wounds
with grass.
   When it became known that a large Zulu force had failed to overwhelm
the small British garrison at Rorke’s Drift,2 the mothers reproached
Cetshwayo severely. They put the blame on the king for not having occu¬
pied the inkatha uninterruptedly.


The King’s Flight
I was at Ondini when the war drew to an end. It was then that British
troops, coming up from the south, were marching on the royal umuzi
[[homestead]]. The king’s older regiments became engaged with the enemy.
But then one day, lights began to flash from the Emthonjaneni range.3
Scouts were sent out and came back with the intelligence that the British
had encamped themselves on the Emthonjaneni heights. On that day
preparations were made for the king to flee. The isigodlo girls were ordered
to collect all the king’s personal belongings and to take them to a safe hid¬
ing place. We left on the very same day accompanied by two of the royal
manservants, Lugede Sibiya and Mfezi Thwala. The one went in front of
us, the other brought up the rear. We carried all the king’s goods and chat¬
tels to Hlophekhulu and had to ascend the mountain, which is the home of
hyenas and contains deep caves, to just below the white krantzes. With the
aid of a rope the king’s belongings were lowered into a deep cave.
  We returned immediately and on the following day we carried our
own possessions into hiding. On that day we consisted of a particularly
large group; we were almost an army of our own. On our return we
reported to the king that all goods were safely hidden. In reality, how¬
ever, the king’s possessions had been taken to safety for the benefit of
those in charge; because! when the king was captured and taken away,
his possessions were retrieved by the men who had hidden them, and
who enriched themselves thereby.


214   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
  On that very same evening at sunset we left the royal umuzi, accompa¬
nied by the king, and marched to his late father’s umuzi, Mlambongwenya.
When we got there messages came in, indicating that the enemy had
reached Ondini. We immediately continued our flight by moonlight and
reached Landandlovu. We had come to the royal umuzi of kwaMbonambi
late at night; but the intelligence that we were being pursued by British
soldiers who were out to capture the king, forced us to flee further. The
king went on foot and we walked with him. He hardly spoke a word.
  At daybreak Cetshwayo instructed his menservants to take all his wives,
children and girls, as also all the cattle to Zibhebhu at Banganomo.4 The
cattle would serve our physical needs and ensure that the mothers and chil¬
dren would not die of starvation.
  All that day we kept on walking, without sleep. From then on we no
longer slept at any imizi, but under the open sky. On this journey it was my
task to look after the [eleven-year-old] Crown Prince Dinuzulu. Then, at
long last, we reached the place of the king’s cousin, Zwide Zulu. It was at
Zwide’s umuzi that we had to part company with the king.
  It was here that he selected twenty girls from among us who were to
accompany and look after the children. In order that we might not be seen
he ordered us to move only at night. I still remember how sore our feet
became through walking among the thorns, especially at night when, with¬
out even a footpath to guide us, we could not see where we were going. The
most gruelling part of our march came when we had to cross the waterless
region of Bonjeni. No, my friends, we Zulus are really a tough people!
   At long last we arrived at Banganomo, the umuzi of Zibhebhu. Great
was Zibhebhu’s joy when he saw—not us, but the large herd of cattle fol¬
lowing us. After our arrival we were split up. The women with children,
and I, were taken to Enkalakuthaba. It was a small umuzi, but we were
received with great kindness and well cared for. The umuzi was occupied
by two women, who were both handicapped.
   On the second day of our stay, Zibhebhu called on us and said: “Now
you will stay with me. In due course I shall restore you to your homes and
people.”
  But this he merely said to set our minds at rest, so that we would not
run away. In reality, he had no intention of releasing us.
  A little later the two royal children, Crown Prince Dinuzulu and
Princess Beyisile, who were in our care, were removed by their uncle,
Ndabuko, a younger brother of the king. He had his umuzi in our neigh¬
bourhood, still within the Mandlakazi area. But Zibhebhu refused to part
with any of the cattle, which had been intended to provide the children
with milk and meat. He made up a lying story to the effect that Cetshwayo
had given the cattle to him as a present. He used them all for his own pur¬
poses and never made retribution for one single beast. He was a real Judas!
  As time went by it became known that King Cetshwayo had been cap¬
tured in the Ngome forest5 and that the British had taken him away on


                                Flight of the Royal Household        ♦   215
board a ship. That meant the final end of the war. This was to Zibhebhus
advantage; because he could now keep the cattle without fear of further
challenge. We also heard whispers that Zibhebhu now intended taking all
the girls, women and children into his possession. All this persuaded us to
flee; a decision which we put into effect three months later.


Our Flight from Zibhebhu
In Zibhebhus eyes we were already his property. He had told his own people:
“Take care that they don’t run away because I want to return them safely to
their homes.” But this was a deception intended to allay our fears. Secretly he
told his people not to make it known to us, that he would not allow us to
leave. However, some of our relatives quietly told us about Zibhebhus
designs; because he was also related by marriage to the Buthelezis. Zibhebhu
was one of the Buthelezi sons-in-law. For instance, he was a brother-in-law
of Saul Buthelezi, who later lived at the Esibongweni mission station, where
he became a church-warden. [. . .]
   So the eight of us [[girls]] left the Mandlakazi, never to return. We
reached Wele at sunrise and decided to rest and have a good sleep. Our
travelling companions went to report our arrival to Ndabuko, a younger
brother of the king. He invited us to come to his umuzi, where we received
kind hospitality. We were regaled with meat, a mash consisting of mealies,
sweet potatoes and pumpkin, called isihhiya [cl. isijingi\, and beer. We
noticed immediately that Ndabuko had made himself independent and was
governing as a ruler. On the following day we took our leave, saying: “Stay
well, Ndabezitha. We must press on to reach home; but we shall call
again.” He replied simply, “Go then, and give my regards to your elders.”
  We continued our journey and eventually reached our homes where we
relaxed and had a good rest. This was a most joyful reunion after a long
separation. The festive atmosphere materialised a few days later when a big
feast was arranged. Two big oxen and three goats were slaughtered. The
first ox was presented as a sacrifice to the ancestors, who were thanked
with the words, “Spirits of our ancestors, we thank' you for having safely
brought back our children.” It was a delusion of our people, believing that
the spirits of the ancestors would partake of the meat by coming at night
to khotha [lick] it. What help can ancestors give us? I now wish our people
would free themselves from these incomprehensible delusions! [. . .]
  We had very many suitors. At times the young men arrived in whole
groups; but the young men from our more immediate neighbourhood were
not to our liking. Sixhwethu and I were enamoured of two young men of
the abaQulusi clan, who lived quite far away. Our own people reproached
us for falling in love with men from far away; but we replied: “Our moth¬
ers belonged to the Ugudludonga [wall polishers] regiment; but we don’t
want to be wall polishersflike our mothers, that is why our hearts wish to
fly over the hills and far away!” This made our people laugh.
  We were in love with those two young men, and actually became


216   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
betrothed to them. They both belonged to the Mazibuko family.
Sixhwethu became engaged to Maweni and I to Shikashika. Some time
after our betrothal the civil war6 erupted. HamuV and Zibhebhu’s people
fought against the abaQulusi, who remained loyal to Cetshwayo. Our
fiances were both killed in the battle of Emhologo in Hamu’s territory.8
  This civil war was later followed by another one which was fought
because Zibhebhu had appropriated the king’s cattle. [. . .]

Our Stay in the Caves
During the armed strife with Zibhebhu we took refuge among the rocks and
krantzes and a cave in the mountain called Ngwibi. The whole mountain is
called Ingwenya and the pass over the mountain is Isikhala sika Madlungulu.
On this, the eastern side of the Ingwenya range is Mount Ngwibi. The cave
is not near the summit but in a depression of the mountain.
  This cave was discovered by Qina Buthelezi, while he was herding cat¬
tle in that area. He is the same man whom you, Baba Mhlahlela, baptised
at Lemgo, when he received the name Zakarias. The cave was so big that
even cattle could be accommodated inside at the bottom.
   On the day on which we moved into the cave a white goat was sacrificed.
The ancestral spirits were implored: “Madlozi, you who belong to us, open
the doorway, that we may enter, and that we, your children, may be saved. The
enemy, who will kill us, if he finds us outside, is close at hand.” The goat’s gall
was sprinkled on the rocks and it was then said that the entrance had thereby
been secured. The pouring out of the gall had truly opened the cave.
  The men then entered the cave first, to see that everything was in order
and safe; then they called out to us, “Come inside! All is well and it is safe.”
I was one of the last to enter. I was afraid that some of the huge boulders
might come tumbling down on us.
  By the friction of two sticks, called uzwathi, fire was made and all parts
of the cave were lit up, enabling us to select nice dwelling-places within
that large cave.
   Penetrating the cave in the direction of the setting sun, we found deep
inside a large pool of water. We turned back in a hurry when someone told
us that this was the abode of a huge snake. This dark pool was quite fright¬
ening. It was fed by a spring, and its water emerged deep down in the val¬
ley. The smoke from the fires was dissipated through fissures in the rocks;
they were such that no sunlight ever penetrated.
   The cave consisted of a series of large white halls. We found sleeping
mats which were alleged to have belonged to Mzilikazi’s people. It was said
that these mats and the broken earthenware vessels, which we found, had
been used by the juveniles from Mzilikazi’s clan, who had occupied this
cave during their circumcision ceremonies. An old woman who had been
one of Mzilikazi’s people and was still living in the vicinity, mentioned that
it had been a custom, that should one of the circumcised boys die, the clay
vessels which he had been using, would be broken where they stood. This


                                   Flight of the Royal Household           ♦   217
woman also related that this mountain was inhabited by the Mzilikazi boys
during their circumcision period. I hey were not permitted to have any
contact with the occupants of the imizi in the vicinity. Those people who
brought food for the circumcised boys never approached closely. They kept
at a great distance and merely called out, “Here is your food.” When one
of the boys had died, their relatives were also advised by shouting: “So-
and-So is no longer in existence. He is dead.” The mourners were not
allowed to cry, as long as there were still some boys whose wounds had not
yet healed. Only when all had got well and could return home could the
dead be lamented.
  One day one of Hamu’s and Zibhebhu’s izimpi took up position at the
cave, but did not find us, because we had withdrawn deep into the cave.
Our enemies were afraid to enter. They sat on top of the rocks and called
to us: “Come out and show us where the cattle are; if you do as you are
told, we will not harm you.” But we kept very quiet and stayed deep inside
the cave, till they moved off again. Those with a little extra courage did
venture to peep into the entrance of the cave; but they did not go inside.
Our men, who were concealed near the mouth of the cave, would have
immediately stabbed any entrant to death. So the enemy moved off again,
without having even tried to enter.
  They also failed to get hold of the cattle, which were kept inside the
cave. The cave was very large indeed. The cattle entered it from the west,
and we from the east. The cattle suffered no hardship; there was sufficient
grazing and water. The cows were not milked either to stop them lowing
for their calves, when they were kept away.
   We, however, nearly perished from hunger; because we stayed there for
nearly a year and were unable to till any fields or do any planting. We were
reduced to searching for and digging up the tubers of a grass-like plant
called inkomfe or inongwe. They resemble the amadumbe, but are much
hairier. We cooked them, but ate them without salt, because we had none.
We also picked inhlokoshiyane berries. These berries we cooked and then
ground them on stones, as we do with boiled nfealie grains. We also
searched the forests for edible tubers, such as the izinongwe, which are only
eaten in time of famine; wild figs; and izikbwali, tuberous veld plants,
which we dug up. All these could be reached from our cave. I shudder to
think of this famine! The Lord preserved us; but our suffering was great.

1. The battle of Isandlwana took place on 22 January 1879. The British camp was
   annihilated.
2. Following the battle of Isandlwana and during the evening and night of 22—23 January
   1879 a portion of the Zulu army launched a heavy attack on the British garrison at
   Rorke’s Drift, but was repulsed with huge losses.
3. The flashing lights emanated from the British heliograph signalling aparatus.
   Emthonjaneni [loc. at the spring] got its name from the fact that here was situated
   the spring from which Dingane obtained water for his exclusive personal use, whilst
   residing at Umgungundlovu.



218   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
4. Zibhebhu kaMaphitha was chief of the Mandlakazi. He was a member of the Zulu
   royal house for his grandfather Sojiyisa and Cetshwayo’s grandfather Senzan-
  gakhona had been brothers. Zibhebhu was an outstanding military leader, who had
   served his king well, as induna of Gqikazi, and during the Anglo-Zulu war. He was
   one of the thirteen kinglets appointed by Sir Garnet Wolseley at the conclusion of
   the war, but on the restoration of Cetshwayo rose in opposition to him.
5. The capture was effected by Major Marter with a squadron of Dragoon Guards on
   28 August 1879.
6. The “civil war” following the Anglo-Zulu war, was waged, on the one side, by cer¬
   tain dissident factions led by Zibhebhu, and, on the other, the royalists, loyal to the
   cause of Cetshwayo and his heirs.
7. Hamu was a half-brother of Cetshwayo, but of uncertain loyalty. At the battle of
   Ndondakusuka [. . .] he had supported Cetshwayo; during the Anglo-Zulu war he
   placed himself under the protection of the British; after the war he made common
   cause with Zibhebhu against the royal house.
8. Revd Filter gives the date of this battle as 2 January 1881; but the editor has failed
   to identify this battle and to confirm the date.


                                                        Transcribed by Heinrich Filter
            Translated by Heinrich Filter (isiEulu to German) and S. Bourquin
                                                      (German and isiEulu to English)




  Katrina Stephanus, Sofia Labau, Magdalena Vries,
   Katrina Skeier, Emmillie Adams, Sofia Kloete,
        Katrina de Klerk, and Lissie Kisting,
              Letter from Keetmanshoop
                             Namibia 1939        Afrikaans


During earlier and unrelated protests in central Namibia, Herero women had iden¬
tified a “poison” in their “nation” that could only be expurgated by a “prophet-
healer” (see text titled “Nation Is Going to Ruination”). The various colonial
officials dealing with the women’s demands concluded that the “poison” must be
venereal disease. By 1939 the administration of South West Africa had “intro¬
duced periodic, compulsory examinations of unmarried black women for venereal
diseases in urban areas.” As customary marriages were not recognized by the
administration, virtually all black women, who had managed to evade some of the
stringent controls imposed on men, were eligible. Since the administration was
concerned with controlling the movements of women in order to extract labor and
taxes from them, this new legislation seemed to provide a way of regulating women
economically and sexually.
   Eight women from the town of Keetmanshoop wrote a collective letter of
protest against the threat of forced vaginal examinations of black women by the
colonial authorities. Each signatory represented the area in which she resided—
Katrina Stephanus, for example, signed on behalf of the women in A Location—
which may suggest that similar protests were being made throughout Namibia.


                                           Letter from Keetmanshoop               ♦   219
(“Location” was the term for a racially segregated urban area where black people
lived.) Eventually a Native Affairs official admitted that “We are not enforcing the
regulation requiring females to present themselves for examination every six
months owing to the first one having been a farce.” There were no subsequent
examinations in the capital, Windhoek, and very few in other urban areas. After a
protest of 250 women in Omaruru, the law was repealed in 1949.
   The letter’s seemingly diffident style disguises an implicit threat that, if their
demand for redress was not met, direct action would follow. The letter was written
in Afrikaans, the mother tongue of many southern Namibians, which makes it a
very rare unmediated piece from this period.
                                                                      Margie Orford


                                         ♦

Keetmanshoop, 30th June 1939

Your Excellency, Honourable Sir
We have been informed of Government notice No 152 of October 1, 1938,
regarding the examination of every female, but this law caught us unawares.
Therefore, on the 27th of June, we pleaded in all humility with the local
magistrate, in writing and in person, to please repeal or change the law, or
leave the matter to us, because we have never experienced something of this
nature. Now, according to this notice, all women must be examined on July
the third 1939, without knowing why. We all know that we must go to a
doctor when we are ill; we have always done that, without fail. It is there¬
fore very difficult for us to understand that we are forced to do this, and
that we shall be prosecuted by the law if we tail to do so. We saw such med¬
ical examinations in the time of the German government, but only on the
women who needed them, or for whom the law deemed this necessary. One
of those women, by the name of Anna Velskoendraer, is still alive and liv¬
ing in the Keetmanshoop location. She can make a statement, if necessary,
about the treatment they had to suffer. All of them stopped getting their
periods and they are all infertile, sickly or handicapped. Those who died
suffered the most terrible deaths.
   Honourable Sir! We trust that Your Excellency will understand how dif¬
ficult it is for us to be subjected to something we don’t understand and
have never experienced. We are already afraid, and don’t want to offend the
doctor at his work or make his work difficult for him on the third of July
by someone or other not co-operating. Such action will surely be a viola¬
tion of the law and will be prosecuted. Because this matter is very urgent,
we are turning to Your Excellency in the hope and confidence that Your
Excellency will have sympathy and will help us before things go that far.
Because we know, where there is a will there is a way.
   We would also want to apologise to Your Excellency for any mistake
that might be in this letter.



220   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
     With high regard Your Excellency
        Your humble women
         Katrina Stephanus
           On behalf of all the women in A location
         Sofia Labau of B location
         Magdalena Vries of C and B location
         Katrina Skeier of D Location
         Emmillie Adams of E location
         Sofia Kloete of G Location
         Katrina de Klerk
         Lissie Kisting of F location


                                                             Translated by Renee Loiter




        Andanette Kararaimbe Gerhartine Kukuri  ,                                  ,
           Gerhartine Tjituka Natalia Kaheke    ,                           ,
           Andeline Kathea, and Sybil Bowker,
           Meeting of Herero Women
                      Namibia 1939        otjiHerero and English


In 1939 the administration of South West Africa attempted to introduce compul¬
sory examinations of unmarried black women for venereal diseases in urban areas.
Since customary marriages were not recognized by the colonial administration,
virtually all black women were eligible for these examinations. Despite several
attempts   by the     colonial   administration     and   some   male   Herero   leaders    in
Windhoek to persuade the women to submit to the examinations, they remained
determined in their refusal. A meeting between the women and some male leaders
resulted in a riot, requiring several police officers to restore control.
   Sybil Bowker, the wife of the location superintendent, intervened, inviting the
leaders of the women to meet with her. Fourteen women attended the meeting
but only five are recorded as having spoken and are named in the official docu¬
ments. An interpreter named Fritz Kasuto was present, and the transcipt of the
interview represents his translation into English of the words spoken by the
Herero participants.
   Despite Bowker’s attempts to place their discussion within the common ground
of their sex, the Herero women remained adamant that they were speaking on
behalf of the women of their community and that the gulf between them and
Bowker was not to be bridged. They clearly depict invasion of an individual
woman’s body by a prying colonial doctor as an assault on a woman’s cultural and
political identity.
                                                                            Margie Orford


                                            ♦


                                            Meeting of Herero Women                    ♦   221
Gerhartine Kukuri: I wish to say a prayer. Holy Jesus Christ, we have
appeared here. Keep us together and bind us in love. Amen.


Mrs. Bowker: Before I say anything else I wish to thank Mr. Kasuto for inter¬
preting for me. It is not the custom for the women of my people to discuss these
matters in the presence of men, but the matter we have met here to discuss is
so important I felt I had to forget my feelings and customs to try and help you.
I appreciate the fact that Mr. Kasuto has taken the same point of view.
   I thank you for coming to see me. I feel you are angry in your hearts
because of the Government’s order for medical examination. I thought if a
woman told you what she felt about it, it might help you to see the
Government’s point of view.
  This infectious disease is a terrible thing. People can get it through no fault
of their own. I know of a person who got this disease through opening a door
which an infected person had touched. His hand had an open cut and so
made a place of entry for the germ of this disease. The most terrible thing is
that children, whose parents and even grand-parents have suffered from this
disease, are born with the germ in them. No people, white or black, can hope
to live as a strong nation unless this disease can be stamped out from among
them. That is what the Government is trying to do to help the people.
   Because the Government knew it was hard thing for you to submit to
an examination of this kind they first built a modern clinic, it cost £1200
to build and equip. They got fully trained nurses, and only when they had
done all this did they order the medical examination, knowing it could be
done in such a way that no wom[a]n, european or native, who had the wel¬
fare of her family at heart need feel any shame, but could feel proud to do
her share to save herself and her people from the consequences of this dis¬
ease. [. . .] When I am ill and have to see a doctor, I don’t think of him as
a man, and he does not think of me except as a body that is sick which it
is his duty to try and heal. When you see a doctor professionally he is only
a doctor, everything else is forgotten.
   The Government is paying for all those affected by this disease—how¬
ever little—to be cured. I tell you this as a truth that if the medical exam¬
ination ordered by the Government is carried out and the people help the
Government in the work they are doing, in a few years you will look with
wonder at the changed and better health condition of your people, and the
number of strong healthy children born to carry on your race. [. . .]
  The Government, and the people who work among you, regard the
Hereros as a proud race and the most advanced race in S. W. Africa. It was
a surprise and sorrow to them to find that resistance to the greatest work
for your good that the Government has done came from you, and that the
women of this proud race behaved without sense and dignity, and threw
stones and screamed at people trying to explain matters to them.
  Will you try to think of this order like this:—If you had a child that was
sick, and the only thing to cure that child was to make it take a very nasty


222   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
dose of medicine, you would not sit still and not make the child swallow
the medicine to save its life.
   The Government is the father of the people and does not order things
that are not necessary. I ask you to trust the Government.


Discussion among the women now took place.
Natalia Kaheke: We thank you very much for your good advice and infor¬
mation, which we have heard clearly. We have heard about the help the
Government is trying to give us. Please madam, please listen to us with
patience. Do not think for one moment it is the hardship of our heads.
    The Almighty God has created nations differently. For instance madam
sits here without a head-dress but we are wearing it. Another thing madam
is wearing a dress and it is shorter than our dresses. If madam even now
requested us to take off our head-dresses no one would do it.
  Madam, please follow us. We say this bodily examination is a very hard
thing for us—very hard. For instance madam, your husband may enter this
room and if he so desires he will kiss you in our presence, which is a thing
which is not done by our nation. By that is not to say we do not love our
husbands—it is the custom of our nation that such customs are regarded
by our nation as confidential matters to be kept in secrecy.
   Madam we again pray to you to follow and understand us—it is not that
our heads are hard—but it is our custom and it makes us unable to submit
ourselves freely to the medical examination in that way.
  Madam, there is one thing we want to tell you. Many of our people,
Hereros, when they feel sickness do on their own account submit them¬
selves to doctors for examination and treatment although it costs them
money. That is all I have to say.

Andelena Kathea: At this stage we have no disputes with what we have
heard from you. We appreciate what you have said, but there is to be a
meeting on Saturday. We wish to be there to hear what is said and there¬
after you will hear from us what we have decided to do.

Mrs. Bowker: I had understood that the meeting on Saturday was a final
meeting. I also understand that the Government says: The order is law and
therefore must be carried out, or the women who will not carry it out must
leave Windhoek. If there is an opportunity after Saturday to further discuss
the matter I shall be pleased to see you.

Andanette Kararaimbe: I am the woman to whom you addressed the letter
yesterday. I thank you very much for the kindness you have done in invit¬
ing us in this matter.
   I pray to you madam, please be good enough to consider what we are
saying to you. We are not for one moment trying to destroy the kindness
of the Government. We do realise that the Government is merciful to us.


                                     Meeting of Herero Women         ♦   223
Madam, see that a matter or custom which never existed in our nation is a
very difficult thing for us.
   God has created a man and a woman to come together and be together
under one blanket, but even our husbands have never seen our private
parts.
   Now madam, the main thing to us is this: We have been rushed at in this
matter without notification. It came to us like a stroke until it made us shake.
We were unable to think what to do at the moment.


The Rest: We say as has been said.


Mrs. Bowker: I give you the Captain’s assurance that the order will not be
enforced until the end of April, but I must say again the order is law—a big
law. To save a people from the consequences of this disease is to give them
life—to let the disease go on is Death. Therefore this law is made. Please
believe me when I tell you I’ve understood what you have told me and I
know what you feel. I cannot find words to try to help you because I know
you feel so deeply. If I speak of smaller things it is to try to express a mean¬
ing you must use for bigger things. I am an old woman now and the world
I live in today is not the world I lived in as a child, a girl and a young
woman. My husband and I were brought up as children by our parents to
live according to certain rules and customs, to think of certain things as
good and others as bad. Today—in this new world—there are many things
we dislike in our hearts. I don’t like to see women dressed in men’s clothes.
If I had worn shorts when I was young my father would have locked me up
and punished me. I do not like red paint on girls’ mouths. To us who are
old-fashioned so many divorces seem wrong.
   But what can we do? We cannot put the world back where it was. No-
one can live today as they lived 50 years ago. The big air-ships have come,
the sea-ships, the motor cars, the wireless. They have changed life for us all.
   It may be that the time has come for you to make a sacrifice for your
children’s sake and conform to an order that is necessary in a new world.
We cannot make the world stand still, and it is not for us to say that the
new ways are bad or wrong. They are different and we who belong to an
old day have to learn to adapt ourselves to the new day.


Gerhardina Kukuri: We thank you very much for your advices. We do hear
you clearly. As you have just now stated the world is changing. I myself am
an old woman and confirm that the world is changing.
  At this stage we have nothing to add. We will go to the meeting, and we
wish to see the other women and convey to them the good advices. We
wish to talk among ourselves and one day we will inform you and ask you
to see us again and to discuss the matter further.
                            *

                                   Transcribed and translated by Fritz Kasuto


224   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
            Doris M. Wisdom (Lessing),
       The Case of the Foolish Minister
                             Zimbabwe 1943         English


Doris Lessing is one of the most important novelists of the latter part of the twen¬
tieth century. Her first novel, The Grass Is Singing, was published in 1950 shortly
after her arrival in London. Since then her novels have included The Golden
Notebook (1962), which has been hailed by feminists and postmodernists, and two
major five-volume sequences. In the first, the Children of Violence (1952-1969), her
protagonist, Martha Quest, moves from Southern Rhodesia to England. In the
Canopus in Argos: Archives series (1979-1982), Lessing turns away from her earlier
realism to create a universe of epic and mythic events. She has also published
numerous collections of short stories and three plays. She has been awarded many
major European prizes for literature (Italy in 1985 and 1988, Austria in 1981, and
Germany in 1982). In England, two novels have been short-listed for the Booker
Prize and the 1994 autobiography Under My Skin won the James Tait Black Memorial
Prize. Lessing’s most recent novel, The Sweetest Song, is set partly in Africa, in a coun¬
try she calls Zimlia.
   “The Case of the Foolish Minister,” republished here for the first time,
appeared in 1943 in Rafters, one of several periodicals that the British Royal Air
Force (RAF) produced in what was then Southern Rhodesia. When she wrote it,
Lessing was involved with a small Marxist group established in Salisbury (now
Harare) by refugees from Hitler’s Germany and members of the RAF. She recalls
in Under My Skin that other white Rhodesians regarded members of this group as
“misfits, eccentrics, traitors, kaffir-lovers.” In her fifth novel, A Ripple from the
Storm (1958), she re-creates with humor the group’s theoretically orthodox but
utterly impractical Marxist analysis of Rhodesia.
   While Lessing wrote “The Case of the Foolish Minister” without the benefit of
the hindsight that informs her later books, her witty irony functions in the same
fashion, here put to the service of the practical socialist, Adam Green, who naively
believes that politicians should get things done. In 1943 Lessing understood that,
while capitalist and reformer claim the same populism as authority for their dif¬
ferent programs, Rhodesian populism conceived of no place for the vast majority
the black population. Nearly sixty years after this story first appeared, Adam Green
might still find Zimbabwe a familiar place.
                                                                      Anthony Chennells

                                            ♦

The case of the Minister for Base Metals and Industries holds a lesson for
every aspiring politician; and no young man who hopes to make a name for
himself in the political field can afford to ignore it.
  Everybody knows that most men, before they have been disillusioned by
public life are delightfully naive. We have learnt to take tolerantly those
maiden speeches in which they point to all the evils of our State, and

                                    The Case of the Foolish Minister              *   225
promise to cure them; we are familiar with those thundering denunciations
of vested interests, corruption and bureaucracy; we have learnt to shrug
tolerantly, and say “poor young man.”
   The hall mark of any experienced politician is that he is able to make
speeches for an hour or so, full of phrases like “The time is not yet ripe
and “the natural course of events cannot be hurried.” This particular young
man, was, I regret to say, an idealist. Everyone knows that one can say no
worse of any man. He used to attend debating societies in his youth, and
had distressingly practical ideas about equality, freedom, etc. When he first
stood for parliament he used to make fiery speeches about the power of
money, and big business, and things like that. He held out alluring
prospects of an inhabited and developed Rhodesia, when these interests
were smashed. Ele got in on the strength of them, because people could see
that he meant very well, and that in due course, when he had settled down,
he would become more sound.
   Everything happened as usual. As the first session progressed his
speeches became quieter and quieter; and before the end of it he had
shown his political maturity by making a speech for three hours and a half
on the native question. What he said, in effect, was, that the natives are
quite happy as they are, and that it would be cruel to educate them, except¬
ing for teaching them things like answering the telephone and how to
cook, which would be really practical. People nodded happily. That was the
stuff. He would become Minister for Native Affairs, they said; he had a
great future. But as things turned out, he didn’t. For about ten years he had
an uneventful career, progressing from commission to commission. At
intervals he would speak to his constituents, and made them sensible, well-
balanced speeches—the speeches of a practical business man.
  And then the Minister for Base Metals and Industries resigned at the age
of ninety-six as a protest because he didn’t like all these new socialist ideas,
and because he didn’t know what the country was coming to. And Adam
Green was given the job. Nobody suspected what was going to happen;
everyone thought it was an admirable choice. He was just the man, the
sound business men thought, because at intervals Sections of the people
kept clamouring for the nationalisation of this and that, and Green had had
a long enough breaking-in to be trusted to tide the whole thing over. But
things didn’t go the way they were expected to. The first thing he should
have done was to make a long speech, pointing out how well everything was
going on, and that without private enterprise a country was doomed. Look
at Russia, for example. Everyone knew that Russia had done nothing but go
to the dogs since things were nationalised there.
   But he didn’t.
  It is difficult to say what had unsettled the sober mind of Adam Green. For
years he had been an ornament of the Government. For years he had said noth¬
ing that could possibly be'construed as unsound or dangerous. Not since the
period of his youthful enthusiasm had he had even a thought that might alarm


226   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
anyone. But at this stage, no one can explain it, he went mad. After ten years
of solid and inspiring conformity, he shattered all the hopes for his future, and
all the prospects for a career, in a few brief months of thoughtlessness.
  Those who were accustomed to read the straws that show which way the
political wind was blowing, early became uneasy. For a short while after he
became Minister, the country patiently waited for reassuring signs of inac¬
tivity. But he made no speeches, he didn’t say anything reassuring about
necessary stimulus of the profit-motive.
   And then, suddenly, while he was speaking to a combined rally of inter¬
national boy scouts (which was a dubious thing to do, in itself, in 1938), he
made a remark that might have meant nothing at all to the uninitiated, but
which set the whole business world agog.
  There was just one sentence: “The time has now come,” he said, “when
we must move with the times, and use for our own advantage the experi¬
ence of other countries.” Then he passed on to a more general survey of the
position. But that was enough.
   A ripple passed through the Chamber of Commerce; the Chamber of
Mines stirred restlessly; the Tory Club shook its elderly head over its glass.
But they all bided their time.
   Then he rashly accepted an invitation to address the Club for studying
conditions in New Zealand, and that was his doom. In ten minutes he
threw [away] all chance of ever being Prime Minister, and was doomed for
all time to be dubbed “that unconstructive visionary,” or alternatively, “that
utopian critic.” He stated unequivocally that this century belonged to the
common man; and while this might be forgiven him as a rash figure of
speech, when he said that there were things that we might learn from New
Zealand, that was the end.
  On the strength of this speech a certain section of the population who
wanted the salt mines to be nationalised, began to think that there might
be some chance for them after all.
   But in the meantime the whole business world had gone into action.
Within three days the Tory Club had started a whispering campaign that
penetrated the country, to the effect that Adam Green was contemplating
becoming a Liberal and joining the opposition. Well, people had become so
accustomed to this sort of thing that the effects were rather slow. Then
three members of the cabinet who held shares in salt, spoke to various influ¬
ential people, and immediately two opposition papers also went into action.
“Green is unsound,” was the subject of one leader. “He must be replaced.
Can any country as small and backward as ours expect to progress if capital
is frightened away?” “There is a rumour,” was the tenour of another, “that
salt is going to be nationalised, without compensation." Shareholders from
England, the Union and elsewhere had heard all about it in no time; and
soon people were shaking their heads, and saying that there was going to be
flight of capital.
   But even this was not enough. After all, the country had got so accus-


                                The Case of the Foolish Minister            ♦   227
tomed to this kind of thing, that people were beginning to have the atti¬
tude that it was all rather like a kind of parlour game that the influential
played amongst themselves.
   All this time Adam Green was calmly, poor deluded man, working out
how one could nationalise salt mines without hurting anyone’s feelings. He
sat in his office with a list of influential shareholders and meditated on
ways and means of appealing to their better natures. He read various books
about New Zealand, and even (when no one was looking) one or two about
Russia. But with his long experience he should really have known that his
day had come. A new member of Parliament had just made a speech about
the necessity of making haste slowly that had set the Government by the
ears. But nothing could penetrate that office where he sat, composing a
memorandum about the amount of wealth that left the country yearly to
shareholders who had long since been recompensed a hundred times over
for their original investments; and about how unnecessarily expensive salt
was at present. One can only weep for him.
  In the meantime the storm outside was reaching its climax. Every paper
was full of leaders about wise statesmanship and the conservative British
character, and muddling through. This went on for some weeks. And then
came the last blow.
  A flaming leader appeared in an opposition paper, with banner head¬
lines “Rhodesia for the Rhodesians.” “Can we afford,” was the opening
paragraph, “on the eve ol the greatest war in history, to fight Hitler and his
perverted ideas with a weapon that is tarnished. Can we afford to let the
foreigners in our midst undermine our war effort? Let us rather allow the
great empty space of Rhodesia remain empty, than let the solid British
character of this country become spoilt. Let us fight Hitler and his
Herrenvolk with all our might, but let us be sure that we are fighting for a
100 per cent. British Colony.” Somewhere at the bottom of the page there
was a remark to the effect that Green’s great grandmother on the maternal
side was an Italian Jew.
  That was the end. Even Green knew it. As he walked down the pavement
people cut him dead, and when he went into the Toly Club people turned
their backs. With a sigh he came down to earth and burnt his memorandum.
  There was only one thing for the Prime Minister to do. He re-shuffled
his cabinet like a pack of cards, and made the new member who had given
that brilliantly non-committal address, Minister for Base Metals and
Industries. The very first thing he did was to make another speech,
absolutely full of the phrase, “The time is not yet ripe.”
   The crisis was over; the Chamber of Mines relaxed; all the practical busi¬
ness men went back to their practical occupations.
  The Prime Minister, as a reward to Green’s long and faithful service in
his sane ten years, made him the head of a commission to enquire into the
nature and purposes of salT Within two years the first section of the report
came out, distinguished by all Green’s old caution and responsibility. To


228   ♦   1920s to 1950s
sum up, it stated that salt was a valuable commodity, and was necessary to
the life of the community.
   There is a rumour that when the time is ripe a committee will be appointed
to enquire into the findings of the Commission.




                Hamsi (Marie Kathleen Jeffreysf
        Though I Am Black, I Am Comely
                           South Africa 1947       English


Marie   Kathleen Jeffreys (1893-1968) worked in the Cape Town Archives
Repository for twenty-nine years and, using the nom de plume Hamsi, published
three volumes of poetry—Summer Rain: The Songs of Hamsi (1931), Sea-Foam
(1934), and A Little Memorial (1942)—which, apart from a few contemporary
reviews, have received no critical attention. A prolific essayist, her subject matter
ranged from the politically topical to the quaintly obscure, with color prejudice,
mixed marriages, miscegenation, and the history of slavery at the Cape providing
her most abiding themes. Upon her death she bequeathed her substantial private
Africana collection to the Cape Town Archives and South African Library, where
they constitute an important resource. Indeed, many of the early texts reproduced
in this anthology can be found in her library, while a wealth of her own unpublished
poetry—housed in archival boxes—awaits further exploration.
   Jeffreys made use of her position as archivist to embark on pioneering genealog¬
ical studies that deflated the myth of white racial purity and, by extension,
supremacy. In August 1959, under the name Miss M. K. Jeffreys, she published the
first of six articles on “How White Are the Whites?” in Drum magazine. Bravely,
given the political climate of the time, her final installment, in February 1960, can¬
didly explores her own mixed ancestry, which she had traced back to Pieter of
Malabar and Cecilia of Ceylon. The article concludes somewhat prophetically that
“a touch of colour” may “in less heated and touchy times, come to be a point of hon¬
our with white South Africans.” Jeffreys’s best-known poem, twice anthologized in
South African collections, is “Colour: A Song of Ancestry.” Here she openly cele¬
brates a racial heritage that she still found hard to own with pride in daily life.
   In her essays Jeffreys sees early apartheid policy as defeatist. This implicit
defeat is also the theme of “Though I Am Black, I Am Comely.” As Jeffreys
explains in her notes to the poem, “The implication lies in the fact that man him¬
self is so poor and mean that he cannot see beauty in the blackness or darkness of
a human epidermis.” Deemed “unsuitable for publication” by the Union Review,
where Jeffreys submitted it in 1947, “Though I Am Black, I Am Comely” is pub¬
lished here for the first time, in a version that appears to have been Jeffreys’s
favorite. The title of the poem alludes ironically to the biblical Song of Solomon.
   The pseudonym Hamsi, Sanskrit for “female swan,” was given Jeffreys by V. S.
Sankaranarayana Sastri, the Indian government’s first agent-general in South
Africa from 1927 to 1929. (In their correspondence he is “Hamsa,” a male swan.)
                                                                       Meg Samuelson




                                    Though I Am Black, I Am Comely             ♦      229
  Loveliness in me lies! In the dark pall,
  Whereon the deep cerulean deeper glows,
  Whence the pale lily and blood-hearted rose
       Draw regal splendour!
  Flag of the King of trees, emblem of Death am I,
          And man’s surrender—

  Beneath my sombre cloak, man his first succour drew;
  To me at last all men must turn anew.
  Unknown the stars would burn but for my mantle:
  Man’s dreams and fears are mine, his secrets half-divine—
          None can dissemble!
  I in the bowels of earth uncover untold worth,
  Where subterranean flames quiver and tremble.
  I guard the deeps of seas, I keep the crumbling bones
  Of the dear dead; even the weak lover’s groans
  Shield from cold laughter! I close the coward’s eyes,
  Bear his dull spirit to the Hereafter!
  I see the Player throw off his poor disguise,
  Assume the master-role! I pitying trace
  The fearful murderer’s lone hiding-place!
  I know the miser’s hoard, good done without reward,
  The hidden sins of man, small deeds of grace.
  The tired beneath my wing find sleep and comforting;
  The sick and sorrowing seek my embrace.


  Wherefore, then, having eyes, my loveliness despise?
  Wherefore my dark delights spurn evermore?
  Pluck rather from their place what hath so little grace—
          Servants so poor!
                                                     A

  Loveliness in me lies, all wisdom’s store!
  Without me, ye are nought; I am the greater part—
  I am man’s inner heart, life’s very core!
  Complement ye of me; complement I of thee—
          What would ye more?
  Though I am black, ’tis I for whom the poets sigh,
          Of whom all heaven knows:
  Death, sleep, oblivion, rest and repose!
  Deep am I as the sea; high heaven cradled me;
  Usher am I of birth; I am the nurse of growth—
          Heart of man’s wdrth.



230   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
         Comely am I, though black;
         Where then in me the lack?
         Wherein the dearth?




                     Nekwaya Loide Shikongo                   ,
                    Song of King Iipumbu
                          Namibia 1953       oshiNdonga


Nekwaya lyaShikongo (c. 1886-1961) was the granddaughter of a former Ndonga
king. Although she remained close to the Ndonga royal family, she also became a
leading member of the emerging Christian elite around Oniipa, the heartland of
Finnish missionary work in Owambo. Following her baptism in adolescence, she
was known under the Christian name Loide. Shikongo was the outstanding omu-
tameki (lead singer) of the church choir at Oniipa, but apparently never publicly
performed Owambo poetry or songs. These were proscribed by the missionaries as
“pagan.” The “Song of King Iipumbu” was performed in the privacy of the mis¬
sionary’s house for the sake of recording.
   Among the Owambo of northern Namibia and southern Angola, an oshitewo
(poem or recital) is often a commentary on political and social issues. Owambo
poetry typically refers to current affairs or revolves around historical persons. In
the “Song of King Iipumbu,” Shikongo weaves into the praise of her sons a criti¬
cal appraisal of King Iipumbu yaShilongo of Uukwambi, who ruled between 1908
and 1932.
   Iipumbu is one of the most colorful and controversial figures of northern
Namibian history both with regard to colonialism and anticolonial resistance. The
colonial administration disapproved of his failure to cooperate in the recruitment
of migrant labor. But he was also an autocratic ruler who made many of his sub¬
jects flee Uukwambi. Iipumbu forced young Christian women to participate in the
ohango female initiation ritual. His conflict with the mission and the colonial
administration came to a head when he directed his intentions toward Neekulu
yaShivute, a baptismal candidate, who was his social, and according to some
sources possibly his biological, daughter. Neekulu sought refuge with the mission.
The king’s subsequent failed attempt to recapture her forcefully from the mission¬
aries brought about his military-enforced exile in August 1932.
   Decades later numerous praise songs celebrated Iipumbu as a hero of the early
anticolonial resistance. Among the older generation of Christian believers, how¬
ever, he was still regarded as an anti-Christian villain. In 1932, certainly, the
Christian community in Uukwambi, and probably the majority of the population
there, rejoiced at his departure.
   Shikongo criticizes Iipumbu’s abuse of power by making use of the new
Christian discourse. She also asserts her right to speak out politically, even though
she is female. Shikongo reclaims power by using the very same Christian discourse
that disallows or threatens female power in the first place. Her position on the
deposed king is paradoxical: She repeatedly reminds him that he has brought his
fate upon himself by his infamous acts, but at the same time she remains skeptical


                                                 Song of King Iipumbu        ♦   231
of the “brick house,” a reference to both the mission and the administration.
Etanda, the circumcision of men, had been discontinued in pre-Christian time, but
to the missionaries it was synonymous with all the “horrors” of “paganism.
Shikongo adopts this attitude. On the other hand, she remains ambiguous about
the amugulu, or “big legged”: the whites who have settled over the oshana, the dry
riverbeds, landmarks of Owambo.
                                                                     Heike Becker


                                        ♦


   Wait, let me to tell you
   Allow me to tell you
   You, Iipumbu, Rise!
   Rise and witness the initiation of men
   Rise and witness the initiation of men
   Look at the horrors being done in the sky
   Rise and witness the aeroplane
   Nelomba, the plane, is moving up in the sky
   The big legged ones have settled on the fields
   The big legged ones are settling over the oshana
   It’s you they have been told about
   You, it’s you they have been told about
   You, Iipumbu, Rise
   Rise and witness the initiation of men
   Look at the horrors of the brick building
   Rise and witness the initiation of men
   Rise and witness the initiation of men
   Are you feeling sorry for yourself?
   Are you feeling sorry for yourself?
   You, are you feeling sorry for yourself?
   You, you brought it on yourself
   You brought it on yourself
   You brought it on yourself
   The big legged are settling over the oshana
   You brought it on yourself
   Don’t you want to see?
   Don’t you want to see?
   Your friends related
   Your friends related
   how the big legged are settling over the oshana
   settling over the oshana
   settling over the oshana


   You, Iipumbu, Rise!      (
   You, Iipumbu
   Rise and witness the horrors

232   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
moving up in the sky
moving up in the sky
as the big legged settle on the oshana


You, Iipumbu, Rise!
You are feeling sorry for yourself
You are feeling sorry for yourself
It is obvious the big legged have been told about you
It is you they have been told about
It is you they have been told about
The big legged have been told about you


You, Iipumbu, Rise!
You, Iipumbu, Rise!
You brought it on yourself
You brought it on yourself
The way the big legged are settling in the oshana
Oh! Look and witness the initiation of men
Oh! Look and witness the initiation of men
Oh! Look and witness the plane
Nelomba, moving in the sky
Nelomba, moving in the sky
Nelomba, moving in the sky


Apparently they have been informed about you
It is you they have been told about
when you brought it upon yourself
you brought it upon yourself
It is you the big legged have been told about
I feel sorry for you
I feel sorry for you
I feel sorry for you
What a pity! Iipumbu
Rise! Get out and look at the initiation of men
Witness the horrors being done in the sky
iye, ye ye ya ye
iye ya ye ye ye ya ye ye ye

The brick buildings are standing
the brick buildings are standing
the big legged
the brick buildings are standing
You, you are the one they have been told about
I feel sorry for you



                                         Song of King Iipumbu   ♦   233
  I feel sorry for you
  You, you were told
  You, you were told


  What a pity! Iipumbu, Rise!
  What a pity! Iipumbu, Rise!
  What a pity! Iipumbu!
  Rise and witness the horrors
  being carried out up in the sky
  being carried out up in the sky
  A Royal was made to suffer
  A Royal was made to suffer
  the big legged, the ones that move in the sky
  the ones that move in the sky
  when the big legged move in the sky


  I am about to tell you
  I am about to tell you
  I have my own staybehinders
  My own restarters
  I have my own staybehinders
  I have my own staybehinders
  Yes, Nangolo the one raised at the brick house
  the one raised at this brick house
  at a mission, where he is not an offspring
  iye ye ye ya ye,
  iye ye ye ya ye ye


  I feel sorry
  No, no. At the place of mercy
  No, no. At the place of mercy
  Nangolo the one raised at the brick house
  at a mission, where he is not an offspring
  iye ye ye ye


  I have Victor
  the one who is over there
  he is the one who went to Swakopmund
  he went to get the cloth
  jersey, underpants and waistcoat
  iye, ye, ye, ye
  Ask the people
  they know nothing about the place
  iye ye ye ye         *
  they are on the boundaries


234   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
he goes with his friends
iye, ye, ye, ye
at the boundaries
at Ombwala ya Mbwenge
iye, ye, ye, ye
He is reading the people of Omundaungilo and Ombala ya Mbwenge
iye ye ye ya,
iye ye ya ye ye ya,
iye ye ye ya ya ye ye
Why don’t you say: “Are you nostalgic?”
Iye, ye, ye, ya, ye


Kambonde, my middle one, you are grown
Iye, ye, ye, ya ye, ye
You are so proud to the point of disrespect
You are so proud to the point of disrespect
with the cockiness of your male peers
iye ye ye ya,
iye ye ya ye ye ya,
iye ye ye ye ye


Nelomba is the one over there
iye ye ye ya ye
Nelomba is the one over there
iye ye ye ya ye ye


I feel sorry
iye ye ye ya ye ye
A Royal was made to suffer
You, Iipumbu, Rise
You, Iipumbu
Rise and witness the horrors
Look at the plane
Look at the big plane
Nelomba is moving up in the sky
is moving up in the sky
is moving up in the sky
The big legged have been told about you
iye ye ye ya,
iye ye ye ye ya ya,
iye ye ya ye ye ye ye ye ye ya

                                          Transcribed by Ernst Dammann
                                              Translated by Nepeti Nicanor




                                          Song of King Iipumbu     *   235
              Federation of South African Women,
                         Women’s Charter
                            South Africa 1954       English


The inaugural conference of the Federation of South African Women was held in
the Trades Hall in Johannesburg in April 1954. The idea for the conference was ini¬
tiated in Port Elizabeth a year earlier, by a group of trade unionists, members of the
banned Communist Party of South Africa (CPSA), and the African National
Congress Women’s League. The primary aims were to draw women into the broader
national struggle for liberation, hear women’s voices, and meet women’s needs.
   Ray Alexander was a prime mover in organizing the conference. As a leading
trade unionist and member of the CPSA, she used her extensive network of con¬
tacts among women anti-apartheid activists to bring them to the conference.
Other planners included Hilda Watts (later Bernstein; see the text titled “Diary of
a Detainee”), Ida Mtwana, Josie Palmer, Helen Joseph (Congress of Democrats),
and Amina Cachalia (South African Indian Conference). The invitation reflected
the particular concerns of women for freedom of movement and settlement, for
rights to education and employment, and against racialism and the color bar that
restricted occupations to defined racial groups.
   The draft of the Women’s Charter, drawn up by Hilda Watts, was presented for dis¬
cussion. It reflected the advanced understanding by South African women political
activists of the dual nature of their struggle for equality, in terms of nationalism and
patriarchy, harking back to the ideas of early feminists like Olive Schreiner, and presag¬
ing the thinking and developments in Western feminism by more than twenty years.
                                                                          Sheila Meintjes


                                           ♦

The Charter
Preamble
We, the women of South Africa, wives and mothers, working women and
housewives, Africans, Indians, European and Coloured, hereby declare our
aim of striving for the removal of all laws, regulations, conventions and
customs that discriminate against us as women and that deprive us in any
way of our inherent right to the advantages, responsibilities and opportu¬
nities that society offers to any one section of the population.

A Single Society
We women do not form a society separate from the men. There is only one
society and it is made up of both women and men. As women we share the
problems and anxieties of our men and join hands with them to remove
social evils and obstacles to progress.
   Within this common society, however, are laws and practices that dis¬
criminate against women. Whilst we struggle against the social evils that
affect both men and worrfen alike, we are determined to struggle no less
purposefully against the things that work to the disadvantage of our sex.


236   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
A Test of Freedom
The level of civilisation which any society has reached, can be measured by
the degree of freedom that its members enjoy. The status of women is a test
of civilisation. Measured by that standard, South Africa must be consid¬
ered low in the scale of civilised nations.


Women's Lot
We women share with our menfolk the cares and anxieties imposed by
poverty and its evils. As wives and mothers, it falls upon us to make small
wages stretch a long way. It is we who feel the cries of our children when
they are hungry and sick. It is our lot to keep and care for the homes that
are too small, broken and dirty to be kept clean. We know the burden of
looking after children and land when our husbands are away in the mines,
on the farms and in the towns earning our daily bread.
  We know what it is to keep family life going in pondokkies and shanties
or in overcrowded one-room apartments. We know the bitterness of chil¬
dren taking to lawless ways, of daughters becoming unmarried mothers
whilst still at school, of boys and girls growing up without education,
training or jobs at a living wage.


Poor and Rich
These are evils that need not exist. They exist because the society in which
we live is divided into poor and rich—European and Non-European. They
exist because there are privileges for the few, discrimination and harsh
treatment for the many.
   We women have stood and will stand shoulder to shoulder with our
menfolk in a common struggle against poverty, race and class discrimina¬
tion, and the evils of the colour-bar.


National Liberation
As members of the National Liberatory movements and Trade Unions, in
and through our various organisations, we march forward with our men in
the struggle for liberation and the defence of the working people. We pledge
ourselves to keep high the banner of equality, fraternity and liberty.
  As women there rests upon us also the burden of removing from our
society all the social differences developed in past times between men and
women, and which have the effect of keeping our sex in a position of infe¬
riority and subordination.


Equality for Women
We resolve to struggle for the removal of laws and customs that deny
African women the right to own, inherit or alienate property. We resolve
to work for a change in the laws of marriage such as are found amongst our
African, Malay and Indian people, which have the effect of placing wives
in the position of legal subjection to husbands and giving husbands the


                                                Women’s Charter      ♦   237
power to dispose of wives’ property and earnings, and dictate to them in all
matters affecting them and their children.
  We recognise that the women are treated as minors by these marriage
and property laws because of ancient and revered traditions and customs
which had their origin in the antiquity of the people and no doubt served
purposes of great value in bygone times.
  There was a time in the African society when every woman reaching a
marriageable stage was assured of a husband, home, land and security.
  Then husbands and wives with their children belonged to families and
clans that supplied most of their own material needs and were largely self-
sufficient. Men and women were partners in a compact and closely integrated
family unit.


Women Who Labour
Those conditions have gone. The tribal and kinship society to which they
belonged has been destroyed as a result of the loss of tribal lands, migration
of men away from their tribal home, the growth of towns and industries and
the rise of a great body of wage-earners on the farms and in the urban areas,
who depend wholly or mainly on wages for a livelihood.
  Thousands of African women, like Indian, Coloured and European
women, are employed today in factories, homes, shops, offices, on farms
and in professions as nurses, teachers and the like. As unmarried women,
widows or divorcees they have to fend for themselves, often without the
assistance of a male relative. Many of them are responsible not only for
their own livelihood but also for that of their children.
  Large numbers of women today are in fact the sole breadwinners and
heads of their families.

Forever Minors
Nevertheless, the laws and practices derived from an earlier and different
state of society are still applied to them. They are responsible for their own
person and their children. Yet the law seeks to enforce upon them the status
of a minor.                                            ^
  Not only are African, Coloured and Indian women denied political
rights but they are also in many parts of the Union denied the same status
as men in such matters as the right to enter into contracts, to own and dis¬
pose of property, and to exercise guardianship over their children.

Obstacle to Progress
The law has lagged behind the development of women; it no longer corresponds
to their actual social and economic position. The law has become an obstacle to
progress of the women and therefore a brake on the whole of society.
  This intolerable condition would not be allowed to continue were it not
for the refusal of a large section of our menfolk to concede to us women
the rights and privileges which they demand for themselves.


238   ♦   1920s to 1950s
     We shall teach the men that they cannot hope to liberate themselves
from the evils of discrimination and prejudice as long as they fail to extend
to women complete and unqualified equality in law and in practice.

Educate
We also recognise that large numbers of our women-folk continue to be
bound by traditional practices and conventions, and fail to realise that
these have become obsolete and a brake on progress. It is our duty and
privilege to enlist all women in our struggle for emancipation and bring to
them all realisation of the intimate relationship that exists between their
status of inferiority as women and the inferior status to which their people
are subjected by discriminatory laws and colour prejudices.
     It is our intention to carry out a nation-wide programme of education
that will bring home to the men and women of all national groups the real¬
isation that freedom cannot be won for any one section or for the people
as a whole as long as we women are kept in bondage.


An Appeal
We appeal to all progressive organisations, to the members of the great
National liberatory movements, to the trade unions and working class
organisations, to the churches, educational and welfare organisations, to all
progressive men and women who have the interests of the people at heart,
to join with us in this great and noble endeavour.


Our Aims
  We declare the following aims:
This organisation is formed for the purpose of uniting women in common
action for the removal of all political, legal, economic and social disabili¬
ties. We shall strive for women to obtain:
1. The right to vote and to be elected to all State bodies, without restric¬
      tion or discrimination.
2.    The right to full opportunities for employment with equal pay and
      possibilities of promotion in all spheres of work.
3.    Equal rights with men in relation to property, marriage and children,
      and for the removal of all laws and customs that deny women such
      equal rights.
4.    For the development of every child through free compulsory education
      for all; for the protection of mother and child through maternity
      homes, welfare clinics, creches and nursery schools, in countryside and
      towns; through proper homes for all; and through the provision of
      water, light, transport, sanitation and other amenities of modern civil¬
      isation.
5.    For the removal of all laws that restrict free movement, that prevent or
      hinder the right of free association and activity in democratic organi¬
      sations, and the right to participate in the work of those organisations.


                                                  Women’s Charter * 239
6.    To build and strengthen women’s sections in the National liberatory
      movements, the organisation of women in trade unions, and through
      the peoples’ varied organisations.
7.    To co-operate with all other organisations that have similar aims in
      South Africa as well as throughout the world.
8.    To strive for permanent peace throughout the world.




                                Lilian Ngoyi,
              Presidential Address to
           the African National Congress
             Women’s League, Transvaal
                            South Africa 1956    English


Lilian Ngoyi was the first woman to be elected to the National Executive of the
African National Congress (ANC). A fiery orator, she was also an experienced
union organizer and former secretary of the Garment Worker’s Union. Masedibe
Lilian Ngoyi was born in Pretoria in 1911 and died in Mzimhlope (Soweto) aged
seventy. Her life spanned the most tumultuous, politically active, and brutally
repressive decades in the history of South Africa. Under her leadership, the ANC
Women’s League (ANCWL), together with the Federation of South African
Women, marched on the Union Buildings in August, just three months prior to
this address at the Morris Isaacs Hall in November 1956.
     Ngoyi gained recognition both within South Africa and abroad as a radical
opponent of apartheid. Together with Dora Tamana, leader of the ANCWL in the
Cape, Ngoyi was arrested while trying illegally to board a ship to Lausanne,
Switzerland, without a passport. Undeterred by her arrest, she later traveled to
Switzerland, China, and the United Kingdom (where she addressed a meeting in
Trafalgar Square), to further the aims of the ANC in its fight against apartheid.
Ngoyi’s contact with women in other liberation movements accounts for her pas¬
sionate entreaty for solidarity with Algerian and Palestinian women struggling
against similar oppression.                              '
     Ngoyi’s activism involved a strategy of appealing to women as women. She
would regularly cite traditional African proverbs—Mangoana a tsoara thipa ka
bohaleng (the mother grabs the sharp end of the knife to protect the child), for
example—to rally women’s support in resisting the introduction of passes. Ngoyi
supported her family, a mother, daughter, grandchildren, and a brother, on the
income she made as a seamstress. She harnessed her skills, both as a seamstress and
as a political leader, to the revolutionary movement, and supplemented her meager
income by designing and sewing ANC shirts, which were later adopted as a uni¬
form by the Women’s League Conference in Germiston in 1953. Worn together
with black skirts and gold (or yellow) shawls and scarves, the colors represented
those of the ANC: black, green, and gold.
     Ngoyi’s speech, addressed primarily to women, reverberates with the passionate
defiance characterized by women in Vrededorp (a suburb of Johannesburg), where


240    ♦   1920s TO 1950s
women fought pitched battles with mounted police. It echoes the cries of women in
Mangaung, Orange Free State, who, when tricked into obtaining passes by tribal
chiefs in 1913, organized themselves and burned their passes in front of the Magi¬
strate’s Court. It reveals a passionate determination to organize thousands of
women into a phalanx ot female defiance that converged on the Union Buildings in
spite of a government ban on all gatherings of three or more, just days before the
historic march.
   Perhaps the most telling testimony to Ngoyi’s leadership skills was her auda¬
cious request for a thirty-minute silent protest by the twenty thousand women
gathered in the amphitheater of the Union Buildings. For thirty minutes, a thun¬
derous silence conveyed the message of defiance the women had come to deliver,
to a prime minister who refused to accept their petitions. Ngoyi’s cry of “Africa!”
and the deafening roar of “Mayibuye!” (return to us what is ours) from the assem¬
bled women broke the silence. Prime Minister Johannes Strijdom might have
refused to see the women, but he could not silence their voices.
                                                                        Gail Smith


                                        ♦

Mr. Speaker and my dear friends I hereby welcome you to this Annual
Conference of the African National Congress Women’s League (Trans¬
vaal). On your behalf I send your warm greetings to the millions of women
of all races throughout the length and breadth of our country and I wish
them success in their sacred struggle for justice, peace and freedom.
   Although they are not present to take part in person, in the important
discussion that will take place at this Conference, we know that they are
with us in spirit and that they fully support our struggle against oppression
and colour discrimination. To-day we have come together in order that we
may take stock of our activities during the last twelve months; in order that
we may examine our mistakes and achievements, our defeats and victories;
and in order that we discuss our present problems, check and remedy our
weaknesses and make fresh plans for the future.
  This is an important job and you as representatives of millions of women
in our Province and as the most conscious and advanced fighters in our
struggle, will be spirited to carry out your duties today with the dignity,
seriousness and determination of people [who] fully realise the sacredness
of their mission and the heavy responsibility that lies on their shoulders.
   The Presidential address delivered at the Annual Conference of the
Transvaal Branch of the African National Congress in Pretoria last week
as well as the executive Report, discussed several issues of vital importance
to the Liberatory Movement. The savage attacks that are being made by
the Nationalist Government on the democratic movement, the deportation
of leaders, the disastrous effects of the Group Areas Act on the economic
and progress of the non-European people, the wholesale removals of vast
numbers of Africans all over the Country, the urgent and vital need for a
broad united front of the oppressed people [. . .] against the Nationalist


                  Presidential Address to the ANCWL, Transvaal ♦ 241
Government, are all matters that are specifically dealt with at that confer¬
ence and I suggest that you read the conference report most carefully so
that you should be fully informed on these matters. In the address I pro¬
pose to deal very briefly with and to emphasise only those issues which pri¬
marily affect the African women.
  The principal and most pressing task of the Women’s League at the pres¬
ent moment is to mobilise all the women of South Africa to fight against
the extension of the passes to African women. Hardly any other South
African Law has caused so much suffering and hardship to Africans as the
pass laws. Hardly any other measure has created so much suffering and
racial friction and hostility between black and white. Any policeman may at
any time demand to see your pass and failure to produce it for any reason
means imprisonment or a fine. It makes it permissible to violate the sanc¬
tity and privacy of our homes. An African, sleeping peacefully in his house,
may be woken up at night and asked to produce one and failure to do so
may lead to his arrest and imprisonment even though he has committed no
crime whatsoever. Before an African is issued with a railway ticket, espe¬
cially when travelling from one province to another, he must produce his
pass to the booking clerk. No trading licence may be given to an African
unless his pass shows that he is lawfully resident in the area where he wants
to trade. Attempts were made recently by marriage officers to refuse to
solemnise African marriages unless a Reference book was produced. All
sorts of restrictions are imposed upon Africans under the pass laws. For
example, in almost every municipal area Africans are not allowed to be in
the streets after 11 p.m. unless they have a special pass from an employer.
Under this system thousands of innocent and respectable Africans are
arrested, flung into kwela-kwelas, detained in jail and cruelly ill-treated.
  The pass law is the basis and cornerstone of the system of oppression
and exploitation in this country. It is a device to ensure cheap labour for
the mines and the farms. It is a badge of slavery in terms whereof all sorts
of insults and humiliation may be committed on Africans by members of
the ruling class. It is because of these reasons that the Congress has always
regarded the pass laws as the principal target of the'struggle for freedom.
It is because of these reasons that African leaders, progressives, Liberals
and even Government Commissions have repeatedly condemned the sys¬
tem as the source of dangerous, explosive and racial tensions. It is also
because of this fact that the Congress has chosen the extension of the pass
laws to African women as a major issue of national importance. The issue
is perfectly clear. The Government has decided that we shall carry passes.
Must we accept this deception? Definitely not! To do so, would be to
expose the African Women to all the evils that we have referred to above.
We would lose our honour, betray our comrades at Winburg, Lichtenburg
and in numerous other towns and villages throughout the country where
the daughters of Africa aVe putting up a glorious struggle in defence of
their rights. When the rights of a people are taken away from them and


242   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
even liberties are being crushed, the only way that is open to them is to
mobilise the masses of the people affected to stand up and fight those
injustices. The immediate issue facing us, therefore, is to organise all the vari¬
ous organisations of African women and individuals against this inhuman and
wicked decision of the Government. Only direct mass action will deter the
Government and stop it from proceeding with its cruel laws. It is in recogni¬
tion of these women of South Africa who have launched a National
Campaign against the extension of the Pass Laws [that] numerous local
and national demonstrations have already been staged with amazing suc¬
cess. In the face of numerous difficulties more than 50,000 women of all
races from town and village took part in these demonstrations. The
remarkable successes we have gained and victories that we have achieved
so far, and the extent in which the women have entered the campaign,
reveal that the democratic forces in this country can stop and even defeat
the forces of reaction if we work hard enough. We have made an excellent
start. The historic Pretoria demonstrations of October last year including
30,000 women constitute an important landmark in our struggle against
injustice and will remain the source of tremendous inspiration for many
years to come. STRIJDOM, STOP AND THINK FOR YOU HAVE AROUSED THE
WRATH OF THE WOMEN OF SOUTH AFRICA and that wrath might put you
and your evil deeds out of action sooner than you expect.
  In spite of the remarkable victories that we have won, there are still some
serious weaknesses in our movement. 50,000 women is still a very small
number in a population of 12V2 million. More women must be brought into
the anti-pass movement in order that the fight should be organised and con¬
certed. The movement against the passes is still primarily centered in the big
cities and sufficient work has not been done on the country dorps, on the
farms and in the Reserves. In these places the organisation is comparatively
weak and the Government has taken advantage of the situation and is busy
issuing reference books. The aim is to isolate the stronger areas and there¬
after to concentrate all its resources to crush opposition in the cities. We
must immediately deal with this situation. I would suggest the appointment
in each province of a number of full-time organisers who will visit various
areas, talk to women, establish committees and bring out mass opposition to
the scheme. We strongly condemn and reject the passes and we shall fight it
with all the resources at our disposal to the bitter end, [and] at the same time
we must, as far as possible avoid reckless and isolated action. Action taken in
one isolated place and without sufficient work being done and without proper co¬
ordination may be disastrous to the movement. It may give the Government the
opportunity to concentrate all its resources in crushing resistance in that local place,
in the victimisation of the active fighters in that area and the crushing of resist¬
ance before it begins in others areas. We must learn to place and to co-ordinate
beforehand so that we might strike fatal blows at the enemy when the time comes.
   To ensure the defeat of the nationalist Government we must work for greater
unity amongst the African people and the broadest possible alliance embracing


                Presidential Address to the          ANCWL, Transvaal           ♦   243
the Congress movement, the non-Congressites and all those who oppose
apartheid. The Manyano women, the National Council of African Women,
the Mothers Welfare Organisation, religious, sporting, political and other¬
wise, should be invited to enter the campaign against the nationalist
Government. In this way our movement will become a mighty movement
for the defeat of the nationalist Government during our lifetime.
   The Minister of Native Affairs has announced that African women will
in future be requested to pay poll-tax. This decision has three objectives:
firstly it is intended to force the African Women to pay for the cost of
Apartheid. Secondly it is intended to answer the attack on Nationalists by
the United Party [U.P.] to the effect that the Nationalists are spending
more money on Africans than the U.P. ever spent. Thirdly and most
important it is an election stunt on the part of the Nationalists. We will
fight against this move.
   We [live] in momentous times. We [live] at a time when the oppressed
people all over the world are rebelling against colonialism and oppression.
We are going through a period when some of these people have bravely
fought and won their independence. But there are also hours of serious
danger. The imperialists, reading that their days are numbered, are becom¬
ing more desperate and restless. The unlawful aggression in Egypt by the
English, French and Israelite armies is an act of aggression and brings the
danger of fear very close to our shores. In such dangerous times it becomes
the duty of the women of our country to put the question of peace [for¬
ward], We stand for peace in Africa and the rest of the world. We stand for
disarmament and the abolition of atomic weapons; we are against military
blocks and pacts. We ask the Executive Committee of the Congress to
demand the withdrawal of foreign troops from Egypt, and the end of mil¬
itary operations which seek to end the independence of Egypt. [. . .]
  It is fitting that I should close this address by rendering our heartiest con¬
gratulations to the brave daughters of Winburg who put up such a united and
gallant fight against the passes early this year. It was in Winburg that the
passes for women were introduced. It was also in this place that direct mass
action was taken for the first time against the passes fbr women. The whole
of South Africa was impressed by the heroism of the women of Winburg.
The reverses we suffered there were more than compensated by the historic
Pretoria march of 20,000 women on August the 9th this year. Strijdom!
Your government now preach and practice colour discrimination. It can
pass the most cruel and barbaric laws, it can deport leaders and break
homes and families, but it will never stop the women of Africa in their for¬
ward march to F R E E D O M DURING OUR LIFETIME.
  To you daughters of Africa I say “MALIBONGWE IGAMA BAKAKOSIKAZI
MALI-BONGWE!” [Praise the name of women; praise them.]




244   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
                Dorothy Masuka, TWO SONGS
                          Zimbabwe 1956        siNdebele


Dorothy Masuka, affectionately known as Dotty, is one of the most celebrated Afro-
jazz musicians of the fifties. She was born in Bulawayo in 1936. She grew up listen¬
ing to the music of Ella Fitzgerald, Peggy Lee, and Julie London, which her father
used to play on the gramophone at home. She started singing when she was twelve.
In Johannesburg, while she was attending secondary school, she entertained com¬
muters at the train station. There she was noticed by a talent scout for Trobadour
Records. As one of the most celebrated African musicians of the fifties and the num¬
ber one jazz singer, she recorded more than twenty songs, among them the hits
“Nontsokolo” and “Phata Phata.” She performed with the Harlem Swingsters, Dolly
Rathebe, Miriam Makeba, and the maestro Kippie Moeketsi. According to Miriam
Makeba’s autobiography, Masuka, who wrote songs for Makeba, was her idol.
   In Zimbabwe she sang with almost every musical group, usually to capacity-
filled halls. She was well known in Malawi, and she spent fifteen years making
recordings in Zambia. In 1980 she returned to Zimbabwe but soon left again for
Johannesburg where she had started her career. Clearly Masuka belongs to all of
southern Africa. She has recorded a few songs in Shona and Sesotho, but most of
her work is in Ndebele, Zulu, and Xhosa, languages that belong or have their ori¬
gins in South Africa.
   “Nolishwa” presents a little drama with two speakers. A very daring young
woman for the 1950s, Nolishwa wears trousers and people criticize her both for
that and for her going out with more than one man. When they report her behav¬
ior to her boyfriend, they hear what they did not expect. In “Hope Does Not Kill,”
also from the 1950s, we are not told how the young woman has been “sold out” by
her boyfriend. Perhaps he has, like so many men of the times, gone to work in
South African mines, promising they would marry on his return. Other disap¬
pointments might also fit the words of this song, which catches the irony that hope
is the agent responsible for extending her suffering.
                                                              Joyce Jenje-Makwenda


                                         ♦

   Nolishwa
    Oh! No, Nolishwa is surprising
    Oh! No, she is so proud.
   Oh! She stands on her own strong feet and I love her the more for that.


   You say you saw her with another boyfriend
   But I love her as she is.

   Honestly, I saw her with another man yesterday
   And she was wearing trousers.

                                                             Two Songs       ♦   245
   With another man and wearing trousers?
   I love her still like that.


   Hope Does Not Kill
   Hope, they say, hope does not kill.
   I say so. Why?
   Because I had so much trust in you
   And you have sold me out.
   Because of what you have done
   I would die now if I could die,
   But, as they say, hope does not kill.


   Hope, they say, hope does not kill.
   Hope, they say, hope does not kill.
   Why do I say so?
   Because I had so much trust in you.
   Oh no, they say, hope does not kill.
   You have let me down
   By what you have done to me,
   But hope does not kill.


   Hope, they say, hope does not kill.
   They say hope does not kill.
   I say so because I should be dead now,
   But hope does not kill,
   Hope, oh hope does not kill.


                                              Translated by Joyce Jenje-Makwenda




            Cherry Stephana Mogolo Sibeko,
      African Women Do Not Want Passes
                           South Africa 1958       English


This letter was written by a member of the executive committee of the Federation of
South African Women (FSAW) to the editor of the Rand Daily Mail. The letter was
part of a broad campaign by the FSAW to rally support for its regional conference,
to be held in January 1959. The FSAW had staged a successful demonstration
against the pass laws in October 1958, and this letter was a follow-up to that antipass
campaign. Cherry Stephana Mogolo Sibeko traveled through the Western Transvaal
to advertise the provincial conference. By bus she went from Johannesburg to
Potchefstroom and then on to Klerksdorp and several other towns. She relied on
contacts in each place for accommodation, but was not always successful. It was a
slow and unreliable process. It was difficult to travel without a pass at this time, and


246   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
women were now targets for arrest. By this time, too, many women had given up
resisting and taken out passbooks. The provincial conference was one of the best
attended conferences ever held by the FSAW, with more than a thousand delegates.
   The letter provides an evocative picture of life under pass laws. Its style is polem¬
ical, but written also with some irony. A rhetorical set of questions gives poignancy
to the conditions of African women’s lives and the threat posed by the pass system
to their well-being and integrity. It draws attention to the impact of the pass sys¬
tem, the mechanism used to police the migrant labor system, on family life, and
expresses fears about the further fragmentation of the African family. The letter was
considerably cut when published, but this version restores its original length.
                                                                     Philippa Tucker


                                           ♦


10709 B ORLANDO II,
Johannesburg.
7th Nov. 1958.


The Editor,


Dear Sir,
The Government of this country is working hard to see that the African
has no home of comfort, but must rather be in gaol. The Government
knows that in spite of poverty and all kinds of oppression, our menfolk are
still happy and consoled by their wives and children as soon as they reach
the shelters which are their homes. Indeed their wives will go as far as
arguing with the police, who are not contented with asking an African man
for his pass in the street, but will knock loudly on the door at dawn when
the poor man is resting and wake up everyone.
   The pass is the same for a woman. Must an African woman really suf¬
fer the same as men? Why? Must an African man really come home to find
his wife has been arrested because she had forgotten to hang her pass book
around her neck when she went to the shop or to call the doctor? (Or will
she be arrested even when she runs after the police van that has picked up
her husband for a pass offence?) The government is now working with ter¬
rific speed to see that a man will return to his home to find that no fire is
burning. The rulers contradict themselves by saying: “You women are not
forced to take a pass,” for on the other hand the women are being brought
with speed by their employers to take the passes, although it is not illegal
not to have one. I only wish the government of this country would go for¬
ward for peace, not only for the whites, but for all South Africans, and
especially the Africans who are the producers of all the wealth and happi¬
ness of the white people.
   African women do not want passes, not even the identity card, which
one African woman suggested in the Rand Daily Mail on November 3rd.
The identity card will still be severe and will not solve the misery of the

                               African Women Do Not Want Passes                  ♦   247
pass. I call upon the government to stop creating unnecessary trouble and
to leave the African women alone,
                                        Yours faithfully,
                                        (Mrs.) S. Sibeko.




                  Phyllis Nt ant ala,
            The Widows of the Reserves
                           South Africa 1958      English


Phyllis Ntantala was born at Duff Mission in Idutywa district in the Transkei area
of the Eastern Cape in 1920. She came from an educated, relatively well-off fam¬
ily and attended Healdtown College near Fort Beaufort, Lovedale College, and
Fort Hare University. She married A. C. Jordan, the renowned author of The Wrath
of the Ancestors (1940), who taught at Fort Hare, and she herself taught at Lovedale
High School. Her autobiography,^ Life's Mosaic, was published in 1992.
   She enrolled for a diploma in native administration at the University of Cape
Town in 1957, and subsequently worked for the South African Institute of Race
Relations in Cape Town. This organization attempted, among other things, to help
African women overcome difficulties caused by the pass laws.
   Besides being an editor, journalist, and teacher, Ntantala was also a political
activist whose interrogation of the systematic oppression of Africans often focused
on women. In 1957 she published “An African Tragedy: The Black Woman under
Apartheid” in Africa South, launched by Ronald Segal in that year. Her activism was
also demonstrated in her involvement in the campaigns against the Bantu Education
Act, and in 1960 she published “The Abyss of Bantu Education,” also in Africa South.
   Ntantala describes with sensitivity and power the deliberate impoverishment
and the calculated disintegration of African families. She envisions the hardships
of women who remain on the land and the perils they must face if they attempt to
join their husbands in the cities. Ntantala also highlights the strength, resilience,
and mechanisms of survival used by these women, deploying rhetorical repetition
to render even more moving their enormous family responsibilities as women made
“widows” by the Group Areas Act. “The Widows of the Reserve” appeared in
Africa South in 1958. Langston Hughes wrote to congratulate her and later
included her essay in his publication, An African Treasury: The Power and the Glory
of the Black Experience (1977).
                                                                   V M. Sisi Maqagi


                                         ♦


Widowhood—a life of void and loneliness; a period of tension, unbalance
and strenuous adjustment. And what can it be to those thousands of
African women—those adolescent girls married before they reach woman¬
hood, thrown into a life of^responsibility before they have completely passed
from childhood to adulthood; those young women in the prime of early
womanhood left to face life alone, burdened with the task of building a

248   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
home and rearing a family; those young women doomed to nurse alone
their sick babies, weep alone over their dead babies, dress and bury alone
their corpses? What can it mean to those young brides whose purpose has
been snatched away, overnight, leaving them bewildered and lost, leaving
them with a thirst and hunger that cannot be stilled?
  And yet this is the daily lot of tens of thousands of African women
whose husbands are torn away from them to go and work in the cities,
mines and farms—husbands who because of the migratory labour system
cannot take their wives with them and, because of the starvation wages
they receive, are forced to remain in the work centres for long periods—
strangers in a strange land—but equally strangers at home to their wives
and children.
   These women remain alone in the Reserves to build the homes, till the
land, rear the stock, bring up the children. They watch alone the ravages of
drought, when the scraggy cows cease to provide the milk, when the few
stock drop one by one because there is no grass on the veld, and all the
streams have been lapped dry by the scorching sun. They watch alone the
crops in the fields wither in the scorching sun, their labour of months
blighted in a few days. They witness alone the hailstorm sweep clean their
mealie lands, alone they witness the wind lift bodily their huts as if they
were pieces of paper, rendering them and their children homeless. Alone
they bury their babies one by one and lastly their unknown lovers—their
husbands, whose corpses alone are sent back to the Reserves. For the world
of grinding machines has no use for men whose lungs are riddled with T.B.
and Miner’s Phthisis.
  For miles around throughout the country one sees nobody but these
women—young and yet stern-faced with lines of care on their faces. This
one climbing the slope with a bucket of water on her head and, if lucky, a
baby on her back; that one going up the hill with a heavy bundle of wood
on her head; another following behind a span of six oxen drawing a sledge
with ploughing implements and only a youngster of ten or twelve years as
her help; and yet another driving home a scraggy herd of cattle or a flock
of sheep numbering twenty at the very most, with yet another small boy by
her side.
   In the ploughing season they are to be seen behind the span of oxen,
holding the plough, leading the team of ploughing oxen. In the cold win¬
ter months, alone with young girls and boys they reap the fields, load the
waggons and bring in the harvest. A poor harvest! What else could it be?
“Bad farming methods of the Native,       is the official attitude of South
Africa. But how could it be otherwise when the farming is left to women
and children, when the whole task of home-building is on the shoulders of
these young women and children?
   At home in the morning these lonely women see to it that their children
get ready for school—those under-fed and scantily-dressed children whose
breakfast is a piece of dry bread, mealie-pap without any milk, and for


                                    The Widows of the Reserves       ♦   249
many just cold samp and beans. Their desire to see their children educated
is so great that the women themselves go out with the stock in order to
keep their children at school—to give them the education that will free
them from poverty, the education that has given the other races so much
knowledge and power.
  At the close of day they light their fires to prepare the evening meal. The
fortunate ones milk and shut in the stock, but for most there is no stock to
shut in, and their children do not know the milk from the family cow. For
some there is a letter of good news from the father and husband far away in
the work centre—the long-awaited letter with money has come—part of
the debt at the trader’s will be paid off. There will be bread, sugar, tea and
a few extras to eat for at least a few weeks. For others it is bad news. The
loved one far away is ill, has met with an accident, has been thrown into jail
because he failed to produce his papers when demanded by some govern¬
ment official. Not that he did not have them, but just that by mistake he
forgot them in the pocket of his other jacket. A Black man in South Africa
cannot forget! It is a sad day for this one. Her children look up anxiously in
her face. They fear to ask her any questions, and she does not know how
much to tell them. “Tata sends his greetings,” she manages to say at last,
“but says we will have to be patient about the money we asked for; he has
had some trouble and has used up all the money.” The rest of the evening is
spent in silence. And when they kneel down to pray, this lonely woman
sends to heaven a prayer without an “Amen.” Small wonder most of them
are old women at the age of thirty, emaciated, tired and worn-out.
  Sometimes, in despair, they get caught up in the snares of unscrupulous
men of means—the only people in the whole community who can relieve
them of their burdens. These men alone are well-fed, full of energy to sat¬
isfy their sexual desires; these men alone have the money to satisfy the
material needs of these women, clothe them and feed them and their chil¬
dren. Prostitution! Call it what you may. But if they be prostitutes it is not
of their own choosing. It is the system that has kept them on starvation
wages so that they and their children can perish slowly but surely; a system
that has made them barren and their men impoteht; a system that has
demoralized and dehumanized a whole people—making the ratio of women
to men in the Reserves as high as 8:1 and so enabling the man who has the
energy and the means to have as many women as he chooses; a system that
has kept the men in the towns in a perpetual state of war, in battle-camps
where masturbation, homosexuality and rape are the order of the day, turn¬
ing otherwise decent human beings into beasts which see a woman not as a
human being but as a source of sexual satisfaction alone.
  Three things break the monotony of their lives. First is the Church
where at least they can take a few hours off from their work, where they
can sing and unburden themselves in prayer to a God who never seems to
hear them; the church which promises them an abundance of life in the
next world.


250   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
  The other is the ceremonial feast—the marriage feast where they can
sing and dance and laugh, rejoicing with the young couple. But it is a joy
mixed with sorrow, for they know that the joy of the young people can but
be short-lived, that they are entering upon a life without a future, a jour¬
ney’s end. And the initiation feast and the beer party—at one time occa¬
sions of great pomp and rejoicing—are today poor imitations of the
ceremonies of the days gone by. For now the women sing and dance alone,
with but the aged men, the blind and the cripples to join in the dance and
song, and all miss the rich deep bass chorus ol the men.
  The third is the funeral—yes, the funeral—where they come together to
weep and mourn over their dead, where again alone, except for the Mfundisi,
the teacher, the cripple, the blind and the very aged, they accompany their
husbands and fathers and brothers on their last journey. The countryside is
today so empty of men that it is these women who keep vigil over the dead
before burial—a thing once quite unknown in African society.
   Tired of their hard life in the Reserves and in despair, they resort to all
sorts of ways whereby they can get to the work centres in order to join their
husbands. But the pass system which is used to control the movements of
the whole African population throughout the country makes it well-nigh
impossible for them to do so. Under the influx control regulations, all the
railway stations have been instructed not to sell tickets to Africans pro¬
ceeding to any of the major cities in the Union, unless such Africans pro¬
duce exit and entry permits from some government official granting right
of entry or exit. If it is for the purpose of consulting a specialist in the
major cities—the only places where such specialists are to be found—a
doctor’s certificate to that effect has to be produced. But sometimes even
with the doctor’s certificate, the official may refuse to grant such right of
entry, if he is convinced in his own mind that the woman does not need
specialist treatment. If it is for the purpose of tracing a lost husband,
brother, or son, or rushing to the sick-bed of a husband in the city, all rel¬
evant information—no matter how private and intimate—has to be given,
and again it is the official who has to decide whether the matter is urgent.
   To by-pass the refusal of tickets at railway stations, these women fall
victim to unscrupulous men who offer to carry them in their cars and lor¬
ries to the cities where they can join their husbands. Is it the lure of city
life that makes them abandon their homes—homes they have struggled
hard to build; leave alone the lambs and calves they have brought up by
hand; leave their children behind in the care of relatives and friends? Is it
the talk of an easy life in town; is it the thought of the cheap jewels they
will wear on their ears and round their arms that makes them pay huge
sums of money to racketeers, run the risk of landing in jail for entering a
proclaimed area without a permit? It is merely the will to live!
   In the towns new difficulties arise. The police hound them and, should
they catch them without the necessary papers, fine them or lock them up
in jail and then truck them back to the Reserves. If they cannot get the


                                     The Widows of the Reserves        ♦   251
papers legalizing their stay in the towns by fair means, then they get them
by foul. Would-be helpers are not wanting here too; men who batten on
their agony. These are willing to “help” them by selling them the papers at
a sum of £15-£25 a piece, though, for a woman with good looks, it may be
much less—£5-/110—if she is willing to add herself to the price.
   Those of them who are lucky to get jobs on arrival in the city are tied
down to their employers under unbearable service conditions. The pass
laws, the influx control regulations and the contract system which give
their employers the right to cancel their permits and have them endorsed
out of the area, give their employers also the power to bully and blackmail,
to offer them low wages and the worst of service conditions.
   Even at this very moment in the Western Province, those of them who
have slipped through are being hounded out and sent back to the Reserves,
leaving their husbands behind. And those of them who are in service are
required to “sleep in,” while their children are sent back to the country
whether or not there is some one to look after them after they get there.
   In this way many African homes are broken up, families are split up. No
wonder the people term the Women’s Registration Office in Langa the
“Divorce Court.” And yet Mr. Rogers, Superintendent at Langa, can say
that he and his men will carry out this breaking-up of families as
“humanely” as possible. And the Mayor of Cape Town, Colonel Billingham,
when the matter was brought to his notice, said he was satisfied that Mr.
Rogers and his men would carry out their work “humanely.” But how can
the splitting-up of families, the separation of wife, children and husband, be
carried out “humanely”? How can anybody speak of acting “humanely,”
when the breaking-up involves so many thousands of women in Cape Town
alone? Would these men consider it “humane,” no matter how sweet and
gentle the officials in charge, if it was their own wives and children who
were being torn away from them? It is only in South Africa and when deal¬
ing with the Blacks that anybody can speak of carrying out such a breaking-
up “humanely”—an action that has brought suffering and misery to so many
people—young and old. Back to the Reserves all these must go; back they
must be sent to join those hundreds of others to Miom each day is like
another—one monotonous song of droning flies, sick babies, dying stock,
hunger, starvation and death.




                 Marion Morel (Marion Welsh),
          It’s Gotta Be Cash for a Cookie
                           South Africa 1959      English


Drum magazine (established tin South Africa in 1951, with East and West African
editions) is crucial in South African literary and cultural history. Including monthly
features on boxing and jazz, gangsters and beauty queens, as well as short stories

252   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
and beauty contests, and a plethora of advertisements that lured urban Africans into
the apparent “upliftment” provided by a Western-oriented consumer culture,
Drums popularity soared through the 1950s. It was banned in 1962 by a white
South African government terrified at the prospect of ever-increasing black power,
notably through the African National Congress and the Pan African Congress.
Then as now, Drum was renowned for its courageous investigative journalism and
the liveliness of its writing style. It is also remembered today as the nurturing
ground for most of the black male South African writers of the time.
   Drums few women employees were, for most of the 1950s, beauty editors, typ¬
ists, and clerks. In August 1952, Mavis Kwankwa wrote a short piece called “Birth
of a Baby” about the trials of being a midwife, but it was only at the end of the
decade that the next women’s by-lines appeared. In 1959, Marion Welsh began to
write a regular column called “Girl about Town,” and M. K. Jeffreys (included in this
volume under the penname Hamsi) produced a series of controversial essays on race.
   Welsh’s feature on a beauty contest in Sea Point, Cape Town, captures the min¬
gled idealization and contempt to which women were subject. Uniquely in current
South African reportage, she provides a view of the insults the contestants had to
bear. Her writing style is unmistakably Drum, with its wordplay and quick rhythms,
and there is even a touch of the swaggering nonchalance taken up by male writers.
The subtitle, which becomes the title for the excerpt reprinted here—“It’s Gotta Be
Cash for a Cookie”—could be either a male editorial voice or hers in male guise.
Yet beneath all this a certain kind of feminist voice insists, “Full marks for poise.”
   Drum journalists often subdued political comment under reportage and play rather
than using every occasion to protest outright, and Welsh too notes, as if in passing,
the differential treatment accorded “non-European” contestants and the poignancy of
the dreams of impoverished young working-class women whose career aspirations
were given so narrow an outlet at a time of poor education for blacks and “job reser¬
vation” for whites. Welsh herself sometimes worked as a model, and in later years—
after training in England—established a modeling school in Cape Town, Marion’s
School of Beauty and Charm, striving (as she herself has put it) to compensate for the
lack of lessons in good grooming available to young black women. She also freelanced
for local newspapers such as Die Burger and the Sunday Times Extra.
                                                                       Dorothy Driver


                                           ♦

It was one of those soaking Saturday nights. I was in the queue huddled in
the rain, feeling sorry for me and the ten pretty girls who carried well-
pressed dresses wrapped in brown paper.
   “Who will be Princess 1959? You? You?” a gay fellow darted in and out
among them.
  The girls giggled good-naturedly. Me, I would have been hopping mad
if I were one of them. It was the night of the Non-European Mannequin
Competition at Seapoint Town Hall. And although it was scheduled to
start at eight we were kept waiting in the rain outside locked doors until
almost nine.
   Finally we got in, and the crowd began bopping and hopping joyfully to
show that all the rain and insults of Cape Town could not dampen their

                                     It’s Gotta    Be Cash for a Cookie        ♦   253
spirits. I went off for a peep behind the screens where the models were
changing.
  Show was organised by a Cape Town dress firm, but the girls—Coloured,
Indian and African—had to provide their own dresses. Factory workers,
domestic workers, waitresses by day. Now with a dab of powder, a secret twist
of their dresses, they were trying to become the Princess for the Night.
   “Gonna, I feel like a baggage of nerves,” one girl told me. “I wish I was¬
n’t competing. I wish I was just spectating like you.”
   Then suddenly one of the organisers asked if I would be a judge. You bet
I would. So I sat in front at the big wooden table behind the golden (card¬
board) crown.
   “Play a march, a march!” shouted an organiser.
   The band swung into “Anchors A-weigh,” and the girls sailed in. The
crowd went mad. They shouted, whistled, bayed and sang. A fellow in an
orange shirt posted himself behind No. 19, and every now and then licked
her left ear. She didn’t blink an eyelash. I gave her ten out of ten for poise.
   Another fellow dived flat onto the floor in front of me. He grabbed No.
7 by the legs.
   “She wins by the legs alone,” he bellowed. And went on holding in case
her legs got away. She went on smiling graciously. Full marks for poise.
  No. 9 nearly brought the house down when she slunk in wearing a tight,
oatmeal-coloured sack-line. No. 18 had the tiniest waist, which quite a few
male spectators tried to prove.
   All the girls looked beautiful. It was the hardest job of my life to choose
the winners. I would have given them all a prize. But finally a prize of £3
went to tall, 22-year old Jane Hoosain, a waitress in a Mowbray hotel.
   “Can I put down payment on the Winner Princess?” the fellow with an
orange shirt asked.
   “Man,” someone shouted back, “don’t you know you can’t get Cape Town
girls on hire purchase.”


                                Anonymous,
          Aunt, Stretch out the Blanket
                            Lesotho 1959       Sesotho


In this song a young woman appeals to her aunt, with whom she lives, to unfold the
blankets of the bed fully, because the young woman will not be sleeping alone. This
is also a somewhat discreet, less bold manner of asking or informing her aunt about
her intention to accommodate a lover. In the same spirit, the next line mentions the
young woman’s intention to “go out for a smoke,” a Sesotho way of saying that she’s
going elsewhere for a bit of love-making first, so as to spare her aunt the possible
embarrassment of having to be present. Basotho women do not customarily smoke
tobacco in any form, but rather take it as snuff. Tobacco smoke is associated in
Sesotho with the procreative powers given to the living by their ancestors. But imme¬
diately she announces that she intends continuing the relationship by accompanying


254   ♦   1920s TO 1950s
her man in his migration to South Africa (across the Caledon River), and she enjoins
her aunt to look after her daughters, and the eldest of these to look after her younger
sisters. This request is entirely consistent with the social values enacted through
female kinship networks, in which women who migrate either with their men or to
work themselves in South Africa can expect their children to be cared for in return
for money and goods regularly sent home for everyone’s use and benefit.
   While the progression of the text expresses the normal, accepted ways in which
Basotho women have adapted to the social necessities of labor migration, there is
as well a tone of forthright independence and courage—first she is going for a
“smoke,” then she is going to sleep with her man in front of her aunt, and the next
thing she is leaving for South Africa, all in one short song!—that have always been
characteristic of Basotho women’s social attitudes, and considered suitable to the
“poetic license” allowed in village party songs.
                                                                        David Coplan


                                           ♦


   Aunt, stretch out the blanket;
   There are two of us.
   Stretch out the blanket;
   I’ll be coming. I’m going out to smoke.
   When I leave here, going away,
   Montsala remain here and look after my children.
   Look after Mamotolo and Malerato and Toma.
   Toma, look after these children of mine,
   Particularly Mamotolo and Malerato.
   It looks as if I’ll be going away.
   I feel I’m going.
   I really feel I’ll be crossing the River.


                Transcribed and translated by David Coplan and Seakhi Santho




                                      Aunt, Stretch out the Blanket                 255
'
1960s and 1970s
    \

            \




        A




*
             Helena Namases and Emma Narises,
                       The Girl Aga-abes
               Namibia 1960        KhoeKhoeGowab and Afrikaans


The story of Aga-abes, the brave and resourceful heroine, appears in numerous forms
in the rich KhoeKhoe oral traditions. This version of the story was told by Helena
Namases and the ending was recounted by Emma Narises, both of whom are
renowned and prolific storytellers with repertoires ranging from history to myth.
Namases, who was born in a German concentration camp on 15 July 1915, has a wide
knowledge of veld foods and traditional medicine for both human and animal ail¬
ments. Although she is not a professional healer, she sings and dances traditional Igais
and healing dances.
   This particular version was recorded by Siegrid Schmidt, who has published
widely on Khoisan orature. In 1994, this story was published in KhoeKhoeGowab
as part of a series of illustrated readers. Originally, this and other stories were
recorded in KhoeKhoeGowab and a dialect of Afrikaans that is unique to southern
Namibia and northwestern South Africa.
   Stories about cannibals are fairly widespread. The peculiar speech habits of
cannibals cannot be reflected in written versions of these stories, however, since
cannibals are reputed to speak through their noses, and are thus characterized by
an eerie sound in performance. Another speech pattern difficult to translate into
idiomatic English is the extensive use of the passive voice for telling these stories.
This translation attempts to stay as close to the original form as smooth reading
allows.
                                                     Levi Namaseb and Margie Orford


                                           ♦


Once upon a time there was a stingy woman. This stingy woman did not
want to share anything with anybody else. She had one daughter, but was
pregnant again.
   Drought came, and the people trekked away but the stingy woman was
not taken along when the people moved away. She was left behind because
of her stinginess.
   The woman said to her daughter Aga-abes: “Oh my child, help me carry
so that we can follow the people!” And they followed them.
   While they were walking, they arrived in the land of the woman who
devoured people. But Aga-abes and her mother did not know that there
was such a woman.
  When the cannibal woman saw them she asked: “Oh who-o-o are you;
walking on the land of my fathers?” Aga-abes replied: “It is me, leading my
pregnant mother.” The cannibal woman said:             Bring her along here first so



                                                      The Girl Aga-abes         ♦   259
that I can smear her. However in most cases, I just make everything worse.
Aga-abes took her mother to the cannibal woman.
  “Oh mercy!” the cannibal woman told the girl. “Go from here and fetch
water from the waterhole where the Nama children play.’ She sent Aga-
abes away. And Aga-abes went; she fetched water from a nearby waterhole
and returned with the water. By that time her mother had already been
killed but not yet slaughtered. The water was thrown away by the cannibal
woman who said, “Go again immediately! This water is dirty! Go fetch
water at the water pool where the Nama children play!”
  So Aga-abes went. And as she left, her mother was quickly butchered,
her twin baby boys were taken from their mother’s womb and placed in an
ostrich egg shell and the meat was put onto the fire to cook.
  Aga-abes returned. “Ye-es,” said the cannibal woman, “now you have
scooped up the right water!”
  So now the liver, that of the mother, was cooked and dished up and
Aga-abes was told: “Take this food and feed some to your brothers after
having chewed it!”
  “Oh!!” cried Aga-abes: “Where is my mother?”
  The cannibal woman replied: “Ae, your mother accompanied the women
who went looking for ‘stone-buchu.’”
  “My mother is not the type of person who would go looking for ‘stone-
buchu!’” said the girl.
  And then she asked again: “Oh, where is my mother?”
  “Ae, your mother went with the people who went looking for ‘shoot-
buchu,”’ said the cannibal woman.
  And Aga-abes repeated: “My mother is not the type of person who
would go looking for ‘shoot-buchu.’”
  The girl tasted the liver and called out: “Hnamhnemhnem . . . hnamh-
namhnam! Why does the liver taste as if it is my mother’s?”
   “It’s not your mother’s!” said the cannibal woman. “Feed the babies! It is
not your mother’s liver!”
  The girl fed the liver to the babies, and once it was finished, she put the
babies back. She put them back into the ostrich egg shell and they lay down.
  While eating the mother’s meat, the boys grew fast—as it goes with
people in a story. And once they’d grown up, they made bows and arrows
and learnt to shoot at animals such as lizards, agams and mice. After a
while of learning how to shoot they could shoot animals like dassies and
steenbuck. They took the animals home to cook and eat.
   Now the boys were told by the cannibal woman: “That woman Aga-abes
had murdered your real mother, and I helped you grow up. Now I am your
only mother so never give her the nice soft meat. You must give the tender
meat to me!’
  The twins then believed that Aga-abes, their older sister, had killed
their mother and always gave her the sinewy tendons from the game
hunted, while the cannibal woman got the tender meat.


260   ♦   1960s and 1970s
  One day after they had grown up, they shot a giraffe and were busy
slaughtering it. Aga-abes arrived and climbed into a [tree] without them
seeing her. And she sang:


                   You two sons of mother, brothers
                   Naugub and his brother
                   /Gowarob and his brother
                   Who protect the one who ate our mother
                   and treat me badly!
                   Huhehuuu


  The boys continued slaughtering. They heard nothing. So she sang
again:


                   You two sons of mother, brothers
                   Naugub and his brother
                   /Gowarob and his brother
                   Who protect the one who ate our mother
                   and treat me badly!
                   Huhehuuu


   “Hey brother! A bird is singing!” said the younger brother.
   “Agh you lie! Slaughter!” the older brother reprimanded him.
   He kept quiet and carried on slaughtering.
   So she sang again:

                   You two sons of mother, brothers
                   Naugub and his brother
                   /Gowarob and his brother
                   Who protect the one who ate our mother
                   and treat me badly!
                   Huhehuuu


   “Hey you! You were telling the truth!” said the older brother.
   “Let’s have a look first to see who it is!” he said and they went. They
arrived at the tree and saw the girl sitting in the tree.
   “Oh, no,” they said, “it is Aga-abes.” They asked her: “Sing again, please,
Aea-abes!”
 O                                                                 _ .   _

  “No,” she said, “I am afraid you will tell the cannibal woman and then 1
shall be eaten. I don’t want to sing!”
   “No we won’t tell her; you can sing again!” they said.
   So she sang:

                   You two sons of mother, brothers
                   Naugub and his brother


                                                The Girl Aga-abes      ♦   261
                   /Gowarob and his brother
                    Who protect the one who ate our mother
                    and treat me badly!
                    Huhehuuu


  The oldest brother now cried: “No way, get down!” So she climbed down
and as she got down he asked: “What are you saying?’
  She told the two: “That woman killed our mother. And I am your older
sister.”
   “Honestly?”
  “Yes, honestly!”
  “Right, then we must kill her today!” they said and finished slaughter¬
ing the giraffe. They hung some meat in the trees, took some pieces along
and left. So they arrived at home.
  Those days, the cannibal woman treated Aga-abes like a servant. But on
that day, when the cannibal woman said: “Aga-abes go fetch water!” she
answered: “Indeed, I, Aga-abes, will remain here today!”
  The cannibal woman said again: “Aga-abes, bring the wood! ’ And she
replied: “Indeed, I, Aga-abes, will remain sitting today!” So the cannibal
woman had only herself to go.
   The meat was dished and on that day she, the cannibal woman, got only
sinews. While she struggled to chew, she asked: “Oh my child, what is it
today? How is the meat today? What did you dish?”
   The eldest brother said: “Oh, we only shot an old giralle today. So just eat!”
  “But these are only sinews!” she said. That day Aga-abes was given only
the fatty, juicy meat normally given to the cannibal woman.
   Right [after], they finished eating and went to lie down. The people
went to sleep.
  So it was asked: “Grandmother, how do you breathe when you sleep?”
   She said: “It is so: when I am still awake, I pass wind ‘tfff!’ But when I
sleep deeply, I go ‘bu-u-u-u-u!’”
  The children remained sitting and talking next to the fire, but the canni¬
bal woman went to sleep. They heard “tffff!” and said “Yes, she is still awake.”
  They went outside and placed wood, grass and everything needed to
make a fire, near the door. And while they were sitting there, they heard
“bu-u-u-u-u!” They whispered: “Yes, now she is asleep, now she is asleep!
Let us get out.”
  They first took some of their things out and then went outside. They
stacked grass around the whole hut, packed the doors and set the hut alight.
And “beu-beu-beu!” the house burnt. The cannibal woman screamed: “Oh
my children, help me. /Gowarob, Naugub! Help me! Huuu! I am dying!”
   “Throw out the clean-clean heart of our mother, then we shall help
you!” the children said. She threw out her own frothing heart. They looked
and said: “Never! This is not our mother’s heart!” And they [threw] it back
into the fire.


262   *   1960s and 1970s
  “Throw out the clean-clean heart of our mother!” they said. So she
threw the clean heart, the clean-clean heart out. Now they took the heart
and left the cannibal woman to burn. She died.


They took their mother’s heart and placed it in an ostrich egg shell. From
there they left for their mother’s land, the land Aga-abes and the mother
came from. They trekked and trekked and as they arrived in the country,
they camped in a place where they found water. There they built a hut in
the shade, where they placed the ostrich egg shell and covered it warmly in
several skin rugs.
  Each morning they went out to hunt and find veld food. One day they
came back and saw that the yard was very clean. This was because the
mother had already hatched from the egg and, when they left, she had
cleaned the yard. But at first she did not show herself.
   “Oh, who cleans the yard when we are not here?” they asked each other
and so the days went on. And one day as they returned, their mother was
sitting there waiting for them. The yard was neat and the fire was lit. As
they approached, the daughter told her brothers: “There is our mother, the
woman who was swallowed by the cannibal woman! That is our mother!”
They greeted their mother, kissed her over and over, jumped with joy and
ran around her, and they jumped because they could have their mother
back. There they all came together again and lived as a family, until more
people joined them and they all lived there together.

                                                    Transcribed by Siegrid Schmidt
                     Translated by Prof. IV. Haacke (KhoeKhoegowab to English)
                                         and Renee Totter (Afrikaans to English)




 Hilda Bernstein            (Tandi), DlARY OF A DETAINEE
                           South Africa 1961       English


Hilda Bernstein (nee Schwartz) was born in London in 1915. Her father, born in
Odessa, emigrated to England around 1900. During the First World War, a time of
British revulsion to everything seeming German, he changed his surname from
Schwartz to Watts. Hilda Watts moved to Johannesburg in 1932, married Lionel
(“Rusty”) Bernstein in 1941, and—besides bringing up four children—became
active in radical politics. She was elected to the Johannesburg City Council in 1943,
the only communist ever elected to public office on a whites-only vote in that city.
Campaigning for the rights of black people and women, she was arrested on several
occasions—for instance, in 1946 for assisting African mineworkers on strike.
   Bernstein was again detained during the State of Emergency declared on 24
March 1960, and it was during this period of detention that she kept the prison
diary, closely written in tiny letters, which is excerpted below. On her release from
jail, she smuggled the diary out of the country to Ronald Segal, editor of Africa South

                                                    Diary of a Detainee        ♦   263
in Exile, who published it the following year illustrated with her own line drawings
of prison activities. Along with many others, noncommunists included, Bernstein
was banned under the Suppression of Communism Act, and thus prevented from
publishing further work under her own name. (She adopted the pseudonym Tandi.)
She and her husband went into exile in 1964, where she continued her anti¬
apartheid activities as a member of the African National Congress and the Anti-
Apartheid Movement.
  Bernstein has published poetry and essays in significant magazines and news¬
papers in South Africa, Britain, and the United States, in addition to seven books.
Among them, Death Is Part of the Process, a political thriller, won the first Sinclair
Prize for fiction in 1982.
   The diary covers forty-three days, though not each one has its own entry, start¬
ing on 8 April 1960, and shows Bernstein’s astute awareness of the ways in which
race and class differences organized prison experience. On May Day, Bernstein and
her coprisoners drafted a petition to the minister of justice, Colin Steyn, which
they handed to the prison authorities on 3 May. They threatened to engage in a
hunger strike unless they received by 12 May “a satisfactory reply to our demand
for immediate release.” What follows here is the story of that hunger strike.
                                                                        Mary Simons


                                         ♦

The First Day   — Friday, 13th May
Five weeks in gaol to-day. The lights went on at six. We are up early. We clean
up all the odds and ends, and drink a cup of hot water. It is very cold inside,
but wonderful when we go out in the sun. Our food is brought in, but we sim¬
ply leave it at the door. After yard-time’ we go upstairs to our cups of hot
water, classes, books, knitting. We all feel well, but very hungry by evening.


The Second Day    — Saturday, 14th May
We all go to sleep very early. An icy wind blows in the night. We wake to
a freezing morning, a bit headachy. M. is keeping a record of every one of
us, each day: our pulse, our bowels, our aches and all other symptoms,
physical and emotional. We drink hot water, lie on our beds, knit, read,
play scrabble, sleep. The day is very long without meals to break it up. We
are tired, most of us feel hungry, but we are all cheerful and well. In the
evening we each have a lick of salt, and that deadly water. It has turned
very cold. We cannot keep awake, and all go to sleep early. One of the
women was released today.


The Third Day   —   Sunday, 15th May
We wake and lie in bed, without much energy. Some have headaches, one
or two are not feeling well. This, we find out afterwards, is the worst day of
all. Hunger symptoms are still there, and the hot water tastes so horrible,
we drink cold water. Our Zhlu and Shorthand classes continue, and we have
a reading of humorous poetry. This helps to cut up the day. After to-day, the
worst is over, and we hope we will not feel so hungry and uncomfortable.

264   ♦   1960s and 1970s
The Fourth Day—Sunday, 16th May
We begin to feel weaker. But hunger symptoms have disappeared. Making
beds requires some effort. We have a discussion and decide to send a
telegram to the Minister.
   In the morning, the Special Branch arrive. We notice them preparing a
cell as an office. M. is called out for questioning.
  The Colonel comes round, tells us we have made our demonstration, and
should now stop. He suggests we will be separated—perhaps some sent to
Nylstroom (80 miles away).
  In the afternoon we are summoned to stand before the Colonel and
Brigadier Steyn, the Deputy-Director of Prisons. He says he has come to
tell us that, as we can see, people are now being taken for questioning, that
things are moving, that there is no longer any need for us to continue with
our refusal to take food. We say we are awaiting a reply from the Minister
of Justice, who has not even had the courtesy to acknowledge our petition
to him. Steyn tells us we will definitely be separated “for administrative
reasons.” We inform him that we are continuing with the hunger-strike.


The Fifth Day—Monday, 17th May
Sleeplessness, and a thumping heart. We lie in bed longer than before. That
foul taste in the mouth. But on the whole we are remarkably well, if a little
slower in our reactions. Two have now been called for questioning, and
haven’t returned to us. We hold another meeting, and decide on a number
of questions for the Colonel. But this morning things start happening fast.
More of us are called out for questioning by the Special Branch.
   Those who have been questioned fetch their belongings from the big
room, and are then locked away in small cells, in pairs.
   The routine is the same for all of us. We are taken into a room with sev¬
eral men. We are read that section of the Emergency Regulations which deals
with detained people summoned for questioning, and states that they are not
entitled to a legal adviser. We are told we are to be asked a number of ques¬
tions, and that the answers may be used in evidence in any future court action.
   Ml of us, with one or two exceptions, reply that we cannot answer ques¬
tions unless we know with what offence we are being charged. The questions
deal with our political activities in the past, our associations with other indi¬
viduals, and our views on the present government, apartheid, religion, and
so on.
   It is a tense, disturbing day. Those questioned spend the night in tiny,
dark and very cold and unpleasant cells.


The Sixth Day—Tuesday, 18th May
We are feeling well, but weak. Climbing the stairs is difficult. The ques¬
tioning proceeds swiftly today. Finally, we are all moved back to our big
room again. Only four, who have not been questioned, are kept separate
and taken to the small cells.


                                                Diary of a Detainee      ♦   265
  Some of us cannot go on climbing those stairs twice a day. Better to
miss the sun than try it again. We send a telegram to the Minister, and to
a Member of Parliament, asking for a reply to our petition. We decide to
carry on for a minimum of ten days.


The Seventh Day—Wednesday, 19th May
Every day is a triumph for us. We are a lot weaker, and everything is an
effort, but we are surprised that on the whole we have kept well—we
expected to feel much worse than we do. Today is visiting day, and we are
all determined to see our visitors.
    Our classes have stopped, we could not continue with them. We don’t
read—we find we cannot concentrate. We don’t play scrabble. We just talk and
talk. What we miss most of all is not so much the actual food, but the whole
social ceremony of eating, particularly in the evenings. The day becomes end¬
less without the preparations for a meal, sitting and eating, sitting over our
cups of coffee and cigarettes—always the most pleasant time of the day—and
cleaning up afterwards. There is no “middle” to the day, it merges into one
long, cold, never-ending procession of hours. The late afternoon is the worst
time of all, when we used to do exercises together. Now we can’t exercise. We
come up from the sun to the great, grey and gloomy rooms. We walk slowly,
and evening slowly approaches. It gets darker and colder. There is nothing at
all between us and bed-time but hours and hours and hours.
    We hear from our visitors that the Minister made a speech in the House
in which he said the women detainees at Pretoria Gaol are not on hunger-
strike; they are refusing prison food, but have their own stocks of food that
they are eating. We are nearly crazy with fury at this news. We immediately
prepare a telegram to the Minister protesting strongly against his untruth,
and giving the facts. We also prepare a statement for the Colonel, who comes
to see us later. Challenged, he admits that we are not eating our own stocks
of food; but he claims we are existing on glucose. We tell him that we ordered
4 lbs. of glucose to break the fast, and that we rationed out 5 tablespoons to
each individual to keep in case we were separated. Aijter the fifth day, we
made some of the weaker ones take two teaspoonsful of glucose a day. We
challenge him to weigh what is left to see how much we have actually taken.
  In the afternoon we have another visit from the Colonel. This time he is
accompanied by a Captain Cilliers from the Special Branch, who tells us he
has just received a message on the telex from Cape Town. The Minister is
considering our petition, investigations will be expedited. Cilliers then says he
must send a reply to the Minister by telex this afternoon. He urges us to stop
the hunger-strike. We ask for a day to consider our reply, and say we will only
discuss it with the four who are separated from us. We then have another
argument with the Colonel and Cilliers about the glucose. If the Minister
knows we are eating, why is^he so anxious for us to stop the hunger-strike?
  Back in our quarters, and the four are brought back to us. We have a
lively discussion. We decide that the Minister’s reply is no reply at all, that


266   ♦   1960s AND 1970s
we have achieved a great deal already, and that because the House of
Assembly rises tomorrow, the Minister simply wants to be able to tell
Parliament that we have agreed to start eating. We draft our reply:


  “Your communication after 16 days is vague and unsatisfactory, and is in fact
  no reply to our petition of May 2nd. We are therefore continuing with our
  hunger-strike. We await more specific information in regard to our release. ”


The Eighth Day—Thursday, 20th May
We are all getting as thin as sticks. Clothes hang on us, we see bones we
did not know we possessed. But we are still all cheerful. We stay in bed
much later, move more slowly. Washing a couple of articles and making a
bed is exhausting.
  Early this morning we are handed a letter from the Department of Justice:


     “Madam,
     I have been directed by the Honourable the Minister of Justice \sic\ to
  acknowledge the petition signed by yourself and 20 other detainees on the
  2nd May 1960, and to inform you that the demand for your immediate
  release contained therein is under consideration. A further communication
  in this regard will be addressed to you in due course.
           Yours faithfully,
           the Secretary for Justice.”


  This has the air of an llth-hour drama about it, with Parliament rising
today. But there is nothing in it to make us alter our decision.
   The six wives are called unexpectedly to see their husbands—ominous,
as this is not the day they usually visit. In the afternoon we are brought
upstairs from the yard—the Colonel wants to address us. We climb the
stairs slowly, resting all the time. We are all gathered in our room, sitting,
as we cannot stand for long. The Colonel is here, with a full retinue of
staff, and men we do not know.
   He says he has two announcements to make. The first is that he has war¬
rants for every one of us, arresting us under a section of the Emergency
Regulations, and detaining us until March 28th, 1961, unless lawfully released
before. In silence we hear this; our hearts feel as though they have collapsed
inside us. We know this is just some sort of formality; but under the circum¬
stances, we feel stunned. As he finishes, the men get busy taking finger-prints
from each one of us all over again—a sort of re-arrest within a prison.
   The Colonel then reads the second notice. He names eight of us, and
says he has an order for those eight to be removed to Nylstroom at 6
o’clock the following morning.
   We greet this with bitter indignation. And find after eight days without
food that we cry very easily. This is a blow; three of the women have husbands
here, and six of them have children they had hoped to see. Now they will be


                                                  Diary of a Detainee       ♦     267
in a prison that can only be visited by their relatives if they have the whole
day to spend driving there and back.
  We ask to see the Director of Prisons, and are informed he is in Cape
Town; we ask for the Deputy-Director, and after some discussion, the
Colonel agrees to call him. While this is going on, the formal arrests and
finger-printing continue. And at the same time, some of the women are
called down for an examination by a doctor who has come at the request of
some of our relatives.
  When Brigadier Steyn (the Deputy-Director) arrives, we request that the
women should not be moved, particularly in view of their weakened condi¬
tion; and that permission be granted for us to apply to Court for an urgent
interdict to restrain the authorities from moving them. Steyn argues with us;
he will not let us apply to Court for an interdict that night, after which it will,
of course, be too late. He refuses to postpone the removals, even for a day.
  We get disastrous news from the doctor. He tells one of the women:
“You must cease your hunger-strike immediately. Your heart condition is
serious, and if you continue you will endanger your life.” He says it is not
a permanent defect, but due to a lack of potassium to the heart. He warns
two other women that they are developing the same condition.
   There follows another of our vocal meetings, with more impassioned
views expressed, but ultimately we agree to end the hunger strike on med¬
ical grounds. We then prepare the following statement:


   “To Colonel Snyman:
       Tonight, several women were examined by Dr. De Villiers, who
   informed two that their condition was serious, and if they did not stop
  fasting immediately, they would harm themselves irreparably. One other
   woman has already been similarly warned. These women do not wish to
  stop fasting whilst the rest of the women are not eating.
       On these medical grounds, and as responsible people, we have therefore
   decided to call off our hunger-strike tonight. We wish to make it absolutely
   clear that this is our only reason for doing so.
                                                  8.30 p.m., May 20th, 1960.”


  We ring the bell, and tell the wardress to call Matron.




           Lassie Ndondo, PAST AND PRESENT
                          Zimbabwe 1962        siNdebele

Lassie Nombembe was born in 1934 in Bulawayo of Fengu (or Fingo) parents. She
proved to be a very capable student and was sent to Goromonzi School, the first
government-sponsored secondary school for Africans in the country. Afterward,



268   ♦   1960s and 1970s
she attended Waddilove Teacher Training College and became a qualified primary
school teacher. In 1957 she started teaching at Mzinyathi Mission where she met
her colleague Lionel Ndondo, whom she married the following year. They had four
children, three of whom have also joined the teaching profession. Lassie Ndondo,
who has been teaching in primary schools for over forty years, is presently head of
Sigombe Primary School in Bulawayo.
   Take Care of Your Children (Qaphela Ingane) is her only published work. She
wrote it in 1960 when the Southern Rhodesia African Literature Bureau, which
had been established in 1953 to encourage and publish authors in Shona and
Ndebele, launched a competition in novel-writing in these two languages. Ndondo
who “had been good at writing stories” since her schooldays, decided “to take up
the challenge and write in siNdebele” despite the fact that her mother tongue was
Xhosa and Zulu was her second language. At the time she entered the competi¬
tion, she did not know her book would be, by virtue of its having won second prize,
the first published novel by a black woman in Rhodesia.
   The plot of Take Care of Your Children centers on two boys, Sikhumbuzo and
Themba, one brought up by a weak father and a despicable mother who spoil him,
the other by a Christian and upright family. They become friends, and inevitably
the one corrupts the other. Because they fail to obey the words of the Lord, they
are punished, as are their parents who did not teach their children properly—hence
the title ol the novel.
   While the novel does not differ in its plot and moral from much literature writ¬
ten in the same period, Ndondo comments on issues that were considered extremely
sensitive at the time. She offers a positive assessment of traditional beliefs and cus¬
toms, describes the brutality of the police, and openly criticizes the government for
having introduced the so-called destocking program, that is, the program to control
the number of cattle the Ndebele could keep.
                                                                     Cristiana Pugliese


                                          ♦

If one looks back to the time when Mzilikazi first entered the country that
was later known as Southern Rhodesia, it will be seen that the people had
a very different way of life to what they have today. In those days people
knew only how to fight, seizing cattle and grain and young men, some¬
thing that today we find unacceptable. A man would go off with his regi¬
ment to fight, knowing that he might never return but remain dead and
unburied in the bush to be eaten by vultures and wild animals. Or if he was
lucky he would come back from battle chanting songs of victory.
   But in those days too the earth yielded abundantly. They knew that what¬
ever they planted would flourish, so no one went hungry, and they drank
beer lavishly. Every family had had sufficient grain and meat, and there was
so much milk from the cows that a great deal of it was simply thrown away.
   Today all that is no more. The white man came with his way of life, his
law and taxes and changed the nation, introducing new customs and new
beliefs, all kinds of things that were wholly unknown in traditional society
before we were defeated. He came carrying a small flat piece of metal like


                                                       Past and Present        ♦   269
a button without holes and it was said that this was the means by which
people would live. To get these pieces of metal men had to abandon their
homes and families and go to the towns and mines to work and sweat for
them. They lived on what they could in these places where there were no
cattle or crops and where a new breed of people called uTsotsi or criminals
came into existence whom no one had ever seen before.
  Can we even count the number of new things that appeared in this new
world? On a cloudless day one would hear the sound of thunder and ask,
What is that? And that was a radio. And at night when you went outside
you found lights up in the air so bright that your eyes could not stand their
sharp dazzle that was like lightning in its brilliance. Nothing like that was
ever seen in the past, nor did the people of those olden days peer up into
the sky and speak of the sputnik. And today’s music, when you listen to it
you feel your whole ear filled up with the sound and your whole body
vibrating to the noise. People’s speech too is so different from what it was.
  The old order of all things has changed and today no one abides by tra¬
ditional customs and no one knows how to behave properly. And change is
still going on, rapidly transforming us at such an alarming rate that those
who behave today as they did yesterday are called old-fashioned. Is it any
wonder that our children don’t know the difference between right and
wrong? For a child depends upon his parents for guidance, parents who
commit themselves to moulding the child’s behaviour, and where shall we
find such parents now? If the child strays into a life of wrongdoing we must
put the first blame on the parents and hope that they themselves will be
haunted by a sense of having failed the child. As our people say, You can only
shape the hide when it is wet and soft, but not when it is dry. The white man
says, It's no use crying over spilt milk, but one cannot help crying. This is the
kind of confusion and crisis that our society has fallen into while everyone,
young and old, men and women, rush to the towns. If we do not advise our
children properly and teach them that the love of money is the root of all
evil—hatred, robbery, banditry, murder—then we have failed. Because all
evil things come as a result of the love of money whiclji was brought by the
whites. The great wise man named Ntsikana from Macicheni, beyond Nciba
among the Xhosa people, prophesied: “The white man will come with two
things; in his right hand he will hold a Bible, and in his left he will hold a
metal button without holes. You must take the Bible and leave the metal
button.” However, we were an ignorant and unheeding people, we took
both, and that is why today our world is in such a quandary.


                                                Translated by Samukele Hadebe




                             \




27Q   ♦   1960s and 1970s
        Noni Jabavu, BUS JOURNEY TO TSOLO
                          South Africa 1963       English


Noni Jabavu was born in 1920 in Middledrift in the Eastern Cape. She was the
daughter of Nolwandle and D. D. T. Jabavu, who were members of a family of
political figures, journalists, and educators (see text by Florence Nolwandle
Jabavu). At thirteen she went to London to study music at the Royal Academy, and
later became a film technician. After marrying the English cinematographer
Michael Cadbury Crossfield, she returned to South Africa only occasionally. In
1960 she published Drawn in Colour, and in 1963 The Ochre People, both memoirs.
In 1976 and 1977 she spent time in South Africa collecting archival material for a
projected book on her father. During this time she published a weekly column in
The Daily Dispatch, a newspaper in East London. She now lives in Zimbabwe.
   This excerpt from The Ochre People describes part of Jabavu’s bus journey to
Tsolo in the Transkei (Eastern Cape) to visit her maternal uncle. The Great Kei
River separates the Ciskei from the Transkei. Jabavu is highly conscious of the
ambiguities of her position as an outsider/insider and of the class differences
between herself and her fellow travelers. Yet they share much knowledge: Xhosa
history and culture, the separatist social and economic structures of the apartheid
system, and the Native Laws Amendment Act (1952) restricting Africans’ stay in
the urban areas and spawning the seasonal migration between city centers and the
reserves. History becomes alive for the bus travelers as the scenery raises issues of
land dispossession, harking back to the decision made by Sir George Grey (gover¬
nor of the Cape Colony, 1854-1861) to populate the land with German military
settlers. Also recalled are the Xhosa First Frontier Wars of 1779-1781, when one
of the Khoi kingdoms fell to the Xhosa, so that the Khoi were assimilated as
Sukwini. The sight of the cycling “pagans” recalls the historical conflicts over suc¬
cession and political power that split the Xhosa nation into Ndhlambe and
Gcaleka followers. The denunciation ofNdhlambe’s ambition raises a similar crit¬
icism of Dr. Hendrik Verwoed, the architect of the apartheid system, who intro¬
duced the Bantu Education Act in 1953.
                                                                   V M. Sisi Maqagi


                                         ♦

Although my father had studied railway time-tables and mapped out my
journey, I felt intimidated by the connections, the tedious waits at junc¬
tions, and decided to take the long-distance Native Bus instead from East
London to Umtata, the Transkei capital; and from there a local bus to
Xhokonxa, the infinitesimally small town nearest my uncle’s place in the
depths of the country. He asked if I had not forgotten what such a journey
could mean. It would be rough, physically trying: I would be squeezed
tight among yokels anointed with fat and surrounded by mountains of
household goods; would have to pick my way through knobkerries and
fighting sticks held upright in the bus by pagan braves; probably sit
between squealing piglets and hens strung up and contained in pillow¬
cases—the sort of journey he had made hundreds of times into parts of the

                                                 BusJourneyto Tsolo          ♦   271
country far more primitive than ours on The Border where we were, so to
speak, comparatively refined. I could avoid the inconvenience by travelling
“incapsulated” in a second-class compartment all the way, rubbing shoul¬
ders only with those of my own kind. When he had pointed out the haz¬
ards and found I did not shrink (actually because I was shrinking from the
train journey), my father was delighted.
   “Well, you will not be comfortable, Jili. But there is no better way of
improving your Xhosa than by taking such a trip. You will be among peo¬
ple who truly speak the language. To keep your ears open will be an edu¬
cation and a pleasure.”
   The bus did not carry only Africans, but it was they who mainly used it.
It was part of the service run by South African Railways into inaccessible
rural districts; cheap fares, spartan accommodation, wooden benches only,
no unnecessary luxury of leg room.
  The bus had, however, a special compartment sealed off by a glass parti¬
tion at the front that was different—upholstered, roomier, which cost more.
There was a curtain inside it which could be drawn across the partition, but
was not always so drawn. That section, however, was labelled “Europeans
Only.” The few whites who travelled in such buses were generally bound for
European estates within the Reserve or hamlets where they ran trading
stores, the little gold-mines like the one in Alice that sell “Kaffir Goods.”
  At the terminus near East London’s railway station, I found a great
crowd and thought they must be seeing off friends in the usual gregarious
fashion. But I soon realized that practically everyone in sight was clam¬
bering on to the bus. Women with babies tied on to their backs with thick
woollen shawls, and leading toddlers by the hand; men of all ages, some
carrying newly bought portable gramophones, satchels of mechanical
tools, knobkerries, fighting sticks, tin trunks, pillow-cases filled like
Christmas stockings with personal belongings. The pillow-cases were
hand-embroidered with legends in English such as: “Beloved,” “Persevere,”
“The Time is Nigh.”
  Some of the girls and women balanced Singer sewing-machines on their
heads, or new cooking utensils that gleamed in the morning sunshine. In
the bus they piled them on the floor or on their laps. Every kind of
“sophisticated” or “backward, primitive” seemed to be represented, with
the gradations in between. There was the usual uproar, laughter, shouts,
outbreaks into song.
  The white driver and conductor stood apart with two or three fellow
whites who were coming, looking on at us with the familiar expression on
their faces which reminded me of how Africans say, “They have a philoso¬
phy of joylessness those people, meet life with clenched jaws, are grim.”
None of the Africans paid them much attention and, watching the con¬
trast, I was struck as often before by the ebullience of the blacks which
seemed to mesmerize the whites as they stared, chewing, clenching jaws at
the scene of irrepressible gaiety, the yells of delight despite the discomfort.


272   ♦   1960s and 1970s
  I soon heard (because they yelled it), that many boarding the bus were
going home to the Reserves after spells of working in town as house “girls”
or garden or messenger “boys.” They were going back to the country to
attend to their responsibilities, since they were, of course, grown men and
women. Their thoughts turned to these home affairs for the shouted con¬
versations were about them as people exchanged greetings; asked after one
another’s health; into reasons for travelling; and for news of births, mar¬
riages, deaths.
  The scene seemed exotic even to me because although most of the men
were dressed soberly enough in Western clothes (ancient tweeds and flan¬
nels, Prince of Wales checks faded by many suns), there were those who
draped the ubiquitous toga over their shoulder, on top of shirt and
trousers. One such man, wearing a new and wide-brimmed jet-black
Stetson hat looked like a Spanish grandee. And his two companions wore
earrings and spotted kerchiefs round their heads. They reminded me of
storybook pirates. The women wore variegated coloured cotton dresses
under home-knitted cardigans or sober-coloured heavy store-bought
woollen shawls. I thought how when women have to watch every penny,
and skimp and make things do, their clothes look haphazard and sad, not
gay despite the bright colours. The more matronly wore black turbans
drawn to a knot at the back and thrust through in front with old-fashioned
hatpins. The younger ones wore white or coloured berets set at rakish
angles, and crocheted cloches—favourite style enduring since the twenties.
And as I climbed up the steps in my uncrushable suit of man-made fibre
and laden only with a lightweight case because of travelling by air, I real¬
ized that other people were examining my get-up as much as I was exam¬
ining theirs, for they made comments.
   I walked down the corridor of the bus between the stark wooden seats,
and remembered the remark the passer-by had made to our housemaid
about pounding his behind on third-class railway seats to Queenstown,
how he had exclaimed, “But it was travel, nevertheless!”
  We set off through the seaside town along metalled roads bordered by
European bungalow-houses washed white or cream. Convolvulus, morning
glory cascaded over porches; and roofs were painted or tiled red or green.
The dwellings looked inviting, cared-for. Soft lawns lay in front of them
and black gardeners held hoses, watering before the sun should rise in the
sky. In the hedges as we sped by, there were flashes of colour: poinsettia,
hibiscus, flamboyants. East London, eMonti, is a clean, orderly, bustling
port and residential town with a long frontage on to the Indian Ocean,
almost all of whose pleasant sandy part beach-line is reserved for
“Europeans Only.” It was not long before the bus was heading out of the
town and inland.
  We climbed up, then down and round the spreading hills of now rather
bare countryside, sometimes dotted with huge granite boulders and stumpy
succulents, or with thorn trees short, bent and twisted; or it stretched out


                                            Bus Journey to Tsolo     ♦   273
smooth and featureless, with isolated houses in the distance protected by
windbreaks of tall trees. There were occasional windmills whose shining
metal wheels were immobile because the day was windless, although fresh
as yet and bathed in that clear light which is a feature of the Eastern Cape;
mornings when, after the vivid colours of sunrise, the day settles into tones
of silver, and afternoon becomes flat, almost harsh.
   We started the journey in the transient, luminous phase which makes one
so wish that South Africa had its Vermeer, its Corot—some such miracle
painter of light. I noticed my companions on board looking out at the land¬
scape. They sat back when they had loosened shawls and togas, and settled
down to what comfort was possible in the restricted space, and prepared to
enjoy the spectacle. Their faces, the usual varieties of browns, looked happy
and expansive as the sun’s rays filtered in through the windows. They grad¬
ually assumed the expressions of people “sitting-in-the-warmth (of sun).”
There is a verb for it, not to be confused with the other that refers to enjoy¬
ment of a different source of warmth—fire. Neither of them have English
equivalents. Nor do we have an equivalent in our language for “sun-bathing”
because southern Africans never engage in it. You see them sitting in the
shade, only watching Noel Coward’s “noon-day sun.” I had been astonished
when “abroad” on the same continent to find not only English-men sitting
smack in it but blacks too. My fellow southerners in the bus would have been
equally taken aback. We were enjoying the sun now in the customary way,
ukugcakamela, warming you benignly right through your body, not “broiling
your outside like a piece of bacon,” as we say.
  I had a corner seat. Beside me was a woman who looked in her middle
thirties. She had boarded the bus carrying a baby on her back. To sit down,
she had unstrapped the shawl tied across her chest, swung it round her
body with the child cradled in it still asleep but automatically adjusting its
little legs from their clasping position round the mother’s hips; and she laid
it across her lap.
    She wore a neat, spotted knee-high frock, crumpled at the saddle of the
back because of the baby. A red scarf was tied round her head, perfuncto¬
rily, for it did not quite cover the thick plaits in which she had arranged her
hair. She smelt very clean, of carbolic soap; and glanced round, her eyes
bright, expectant. She craned her neck to see into the far corners of the bus
as if hoping to espy a friend. For a time she fidgeted so much, sizing up all
the occupants, that I wondered the child did not wake. But it lay in her
arms and breathed deeply, its chubby cherub’s cheeks framed by the shawl
softly draped about its face. The baby seemed as peaceful as the mother was
restless. She lost no time in striking up conversations with those near—with
me, then with people in the seats before us; then to her right, to those
before them; to say nothing of those in the seats behind us. She found
nobody she knew, but those present would do. We were transfixed by quan¬
tities of bags and baggage, baskets of provisions to eat on the long journey.
In between them inquisitive infant girls attempted perilous steps, clutching


274   ♦   1960s AND 1970s
some treasured tattered doll made of rags; or mealie-husk doing duty for
one and wrapped in cotton scraps; or little boys a battered toy motor car.
But mothers would drag them back, straighten out miniature frocks or
trousers, and ruthlessly wipe running noses. All of us bobbed up and down
as the bus bumped and swayed, and it was difficult to control one’s voice.
We shouted, answering shouted personal questions about one another.
  After a while, personalities began to assert themselves and one of these was
a man sitting behind me. He gained the attention of the entire bus-load by
launching on a discourse about the locality we were passing through. An
authoritative-looking man, in his fifties; obviously a labourer, but dressed as
one long accustomed to town life. He wore a blue scarf like a cravat at the
neck, a respectable felt hat and underneath the heavy overcoat which he
unbuttoned, an exceedingly old suit in clerical grey, chalk-striped. When the
bus was outside Potsdam, he called out, “Heyi! Do you people see the good
country those Germans received here when they were brought to settle? These
rolling plains, my friends—land made for cattle. Bafondini! It is said that of
old, this grass was so nutritious, cattle grazed themselves to a standstill, were
bewildered by repletion. Then these Germans were allotted the land, dislodg¬
ing people who already herded here. And, of course, they wanted to remind
themselves of their country. Hence ‘Potsdam’ here, ‘Berlin’ there. Little
Germany! Yet the Hottentots, amaLawu, had already named these places, hav¬
ing been here even before we arrived. Or rather, amaK.hosa arrived.” It was
already clear from some of his phrases that he was not a Xhosa man.
   “Now wwXhosa lived alongside z'Lawu, on crossing the Kei River. Hear
the Lawu names of these local rivers: Qwelra, AAaruni, which the whites
pronounce ‘Xwelega, N&hoon like infants because defeated by the virile
Hottentot sounds. But when zzwXhosa arrived, he pronounced them all
right; had already taken over those Hottentot click embellishments into his
own language. Why? Because Hottentots were people of our ilk: reared cat¬
tle. Did not z/wXhosa give Hottentots a praise-name, salutation, ‘Sukwini,’
referring to the skill of that tribe in tanning hides? Those people lived all
right with Xhosa, ‘side-by-side’; both lived proper masihlalisane."
Everybody burst out laughing for he used the word in its new “town” sense
in which it refers to a sociological phenomenon; “improper temporary sex¬
ual partnerships” of men and women working in the urban areas, one spouse
absent, looking after the home in the country, relationships for which the
pagans use a harsher name. His speech was an elaborate joke. We all knew
for instance that Hottentot and Xhosa had recognized each other’s soci¬
eties, had intermarried legally, accepting each other as neighbours. He was
playing with words and we joined in his merry mood of comparing the past
with modern town life—now that the bus was taking us away from it all.
His comments made us all look at the countryside anew. People fired ques¬
tions at him about it, or contributed from their own knowledge.
   Climbing up a gentle incline, one of whose slopes was covered with rows of
pineapples, we met a group of pagans cycling. Their robes billowed in the air


                                              Bus Journey to Tsolo       ♦   275
behind them, like red sails. They free-wheeled, laughing and shouting, teeth
flashing in the sunlight. The speaker half rose as they drew level, and called out
to them through the window, all our heads turning to watch him and them.
Then he said to us, but still—of course—shouting, “Behold the people of
Ndhlambe! Daubed in their special shade of ochre, the dark red that reminds
of dried blood.” It was different from the one preferred in my Middledrift and
Alice districts. “These ochred ones are getting civilized—eh? Their Europeans
grow these pineapples, wax fat on the exports. Some of that fat drips on to us
and these cyclists. Now I approve of that. Why should a pagan bother to eat
those things that rot the teeth? He has more sense, spends the money earned
from working on them on buying things he wants. In East London some
pagans own cars. Chaps who can’t read, would go cross-eyed if you spelled a a,
ebe, net   on a blackboard for them!” Roars of laughter, interruptions. “Why
trouble himself? Is he not doing all right? I tell you people-of-this-bus, you
Xhosa-of-Gcaleka from across-the-Kei, these Xhosa-of-Ndhlambe-on-A&i'j-
side of the river are overtaking you. Progress! They aim to privately own land!
To be themselves exporters, not for ever ‘work like small boys for the
European.” You had to smile. My father had been right about the idioms. In
addition was I not listening to the things people dreamed about? I was suspi¬
cious for example of the cajolery about motor-owning pagans. Was it a reflec¬
tion of the man’s own secret wishes? Everyone knew that pagans were not
interested in the Westernized life. They pursued their own alongside ours
(whom they call almost pejoratively “school” people); and restrict themselves
when forced by circumstances into towns for temporary work—to the acquisi¬
tion of only such habits or possessions (bicycles, sewing-machines, ploughs) as
did not conflict with membership of their society. Therefore did the lofty
amusement over the Red people reflect a secret admiration for their serenity,
positiveness, the “lack of doubts' that my father’s friend had talked about? In any
case the chatter was different from some I had heard on country buses in
England, my other homeland. Here people were not avoiding personal matters
or universal human themes; certainly not steering clear of religion, sex. They
discussed history, politics, land reform, property, sociology—analphabetic
though most of the speakers were. These seemed to be the topics they consid¬
ered important, which superseded “small talk” about the weather, wages, or
whites. Not that those three were not pressing. One saw that they were, but did
not seem to occupy the whole of the bus-load’s frontal lobes. The travellers
probably did not consciously classify any of these subjects. Conversation hinged
on them because as individuals they were preoccupied by the history of “the
migrations” of tribes and the encounters that these had brought; and, naturally,
by the structure of society, since that had been the root cause of those move¬
ments of populations. The bus was now crossing country that had been
migrated into and settled by Chief Ndhlambe; and it was his descendants and
followers whose huts we were passing and whom we saw walking and bicycling.
Their territory stretched from East London to Idutywa, on the far bank of the
historical river that lay ahead of us, zNciba—the Great Kei.


276   ♦    1960s and 1970s
  The migrations had been, of course, the only way in which a polygynous
nation could solve the political problems that accompanied royal succes¬
sion; the whole thing an expression of the patriarchal family system, based
inflexibly on primogeniture which every one of us clung to; so that history
was not dead but alive. It was drdled into us subtly or overtly from the
moment we learnt to talk. The authoritative labourer was dealing with sub¬
jects close to our hearts in talking about who peopled the land; the partic¬
ular successions that had brought them; about heirs; about the “idiocy, nay
backwardness, savagery, of nations such as Boers whose custom allowed all
of a man’s sons to inherit in equal proportions!”
   How then was that succession arranged, whose consequences fdled our
conversation as the bus rolled on? That was what we talked about, and the
complex relationships that it involved. People delved into those archives that
they carry in their heads. We discussed events like the recurring activities of
Regents who tried to usurp the patrimony; a perpetual historical hazard,
because the patriarchal system had meant that when the Chief died, the heir
was invariably an infant since the “Great Wife”—the “national” wife and
mother of the successor—was never the first woman he had married; under
polygamy Chiefs were supposed to get into practice, so to speak, in their ear¬
lier, “personal choice” marriages, and only “marry for the nation” (with cattle
contributed by it) in middle life when they were proven sires. This very
Ndhlambe had “usurped,” and at the great Battle of Amalinde not far from
Middledrift had tried to displace his young nephew Ngqika (“Gaika”), the
true Right Hand heir who had removed to what is now called the Ciskei; and
whose “following” my own family belonged to by descent. My male relations
came under a further sub-division for the purposes of war. Each was a subject
of the subsidiary ruler in whose territory he happened to have been born: my
brother’s liege lord was Maqoma, as the old man had said when my uncles
and I called on him. My grandfather’s had been Ntinde, in the King William’s
Town area; and my father’s yet another, in the Peddie district; yet all “people
of Ngqika.” Thoughts of Ndhlambe and his type stirred one woman passen¬
ger to shout in a clear treble, “Usurpers—true examples of the intransigence
of human nature, of individuals who do not regulate those emotions that are
inimical to the public interest!” Upon which lively rhetoric broke out:
   “What medicine ever cures covetousness?”
  “Or sinister deeds.”
  “Or power madness—ukukhukhumala/” (I relished that lovely word.)
  “Will society ever perfect the devices by which it tries, tries to eradicate
man’s anti-social tendencies?” The bus bumped along while a latter-day
aspect of the theme was given an exhaustive airing: “the enigma of todays
‘Paramount Chief of the Bantu.’” For that was how Dr. Verwoerd had
recently styled himself, and the bus resounded with jokes, “Cuckoo in the
nest”; “Anti-social”; “Wrecker of established order”; “Usurper, worse, gate¬
crasher; and okhukhumeleyo at that, puffing that chest like a pouter pigeon, in
a nest where he had no rights whatsoever, either by blood or cattle.” I could


                                             Bus Journey to Tsolo       ♦   277
only reflect how differently the countryside must appear, wonder what
thoughts it inspired, if like some of the Europeans hygienically sealed off
from us by the glass partition you perhaps did not know the language and
could not understand what was being said. You would note the scenery to be
sure, with its roadside advertisements for South African Beers, or
“Cigarettes.” You would note the characteristic hamlets at which the bus
stopped at petrol pumps labelled in English, “Pegasus Oil, or in Afrikaans,
“Ry met die Rooi Perd"\ and see the white-owned stores standing in dust and
rubble; the indigent natives, the sunburnt whites; all features that created an
effect of spiritual barrenness because not apparently integrated. However, I
had not much time for these private thoughts. Indeed, the attitude of soci¬
ety, as exemplified even by my fellow passengers, towards individual privacy
was one of the undeniable drawbacks in the life at home. Privacy was anti¬
social, contrary to the public interest” so that inwardly, chasms yawned
before you if your personal inclinations and habits tended against the prin¬
ciple. Marvellous, I thought, that people like my father managed to write
and think, always exposed to the public gaze, to sociability.
  The woman beside me asked my clan name, where I was going, and why.
The man behind us heard, having for the time being finished his speeches,
and promptly exclaimed, “Of So we have a Jili in this bus? Do you people
know Jili?” sweeping the question right round. Three admitted not knowing,
upon which he cried, ‘“Kwek.r Ignorant people are abroad these days,” and
proceeded to repair their knowledge. Meanwhile the culprits gazed at me
good-naturedly. Two of them were the young men who had put me in mind
of pirates when I spotted their ear-rings and the kerchiefs round their heads,
the third wearing the Stetson hat. “Country bumpkins,” the man now called
them in Xhosa slang. Immobile and silent, they put me in mind of yet
another imaginary type—my idea of American Indian braves, for each held
between his knees like a tomahawk a nearly six-foot polished knobkerrie.
One of them had an aquiline profile, the nose almost hooked. And all three
looked at me with bland, dark eyes. I stared back thinking how handsome
they were. They smiled faintly now that the older man twitted them:
   “Kaloku these are zzmaMpondo, as you see,” he explained. “That is the
reason they know nothing. For what is the main preoccupation among
them and the zzOTzzMpondomise, over on that other bank of the zzmBashe?
Beer Feasts and Stock-theft. Is it not so, young men?”
   But while they glanced at one another uncertainly, he continued, “Of
course it is. I know. I am one of you. My clan name is Jola. I am zzzMbo. No
Xhosa, I, although having lived years on end in Ndhlambe’s territory, in East
London working for these whites. So handsome ones, I may tell the truth
about ourselves, eh?”
  They acknowledged his privilege with abashed smiles, not speaking. So
he went on, talked about hiynself in order to “explain about azzzzzMpondo.”
As usual the impression was not of an inordinate egocentricity but that he
was using a personal experience to illustrate the variety of life’s circum-


278   ♦   1960s AND 1970s
stances. He was representing others like him to show how their ideas
were tempered by the changing times.
   “Now look at me: I am one of those who weaned himself early from that
life ol tranquillity-in-sterility in the Arcadia of Pondoland,” and he used a
metaphor that made us all laugh, one of those that people loved. When the
laughter died down, he went on, “I left thirty-five years ago to work in town
  understand?” The warriors gazed at him obediently, since he wished it,
had taken charge, and they had no choice because of his seniority, “You see,
our chiefs had long ago sent word to ‘abefundisi, teachers’ (missionaries) to
come to us. It was they who taught me to read and write. Wesleyans.
Presbyterians. Church of England. Men of beautiful works. Their wives ran
little hospitals, and sewing classes and such things. Ah, it was beauty, beauty!
 Then I wished to go forth, see the world, and work; and did myself a good
turn. For as you now see me, I know things that I would never have known—
through work. Therefore,” he harangued, “pay attention while I tell you who
this person is. Not only the Pondo braves, the whole bus-load turned to
look at me, craning necks to do so. However, before he could launch on my
family history, a woman of about his age intervened. She could not see from
where she sat exactly what he did as he stretched a hand towards my shoul¬
der, and she cried out, “Yol Is he pointing at her?” But everyone hastened to
reassure her, and Jola shouted, “No indeed, mother, I declare I am only tap¬
ping her shoulder, certainly not being so savage as to point!’’
  The elderly lady laughed good-naturedly, then she now launched on a
dissertation; about pagan beliefs in the evils of pointing at people. It
turned out that she too was a Pondo, a “converted,” of Christian family.
Now that the talk was about the life of her tribe she was moved to con¬
tribute, for Pondoland was a reservoir of ancient lore.
   Presently it was Jola’s turn to take up his interrupted tale about my fam¬
ily. The mood was expansive for we had all day in the bus. The woman
interjected pieces of her own knowledge about Makiwanes, for it tran¬
spired that she came from Umtata where my younger uncle lived and
where I was to spend the night in order to catch an early local bus the next
day to my uncle at Tsolo.
  The bus came to the Great Kei. The river lies in the folds of a breath¬
taking valley, between hills covered with bush and brown boulders. The
road twists back on itself down steep inclines until level with the bridge.
From above, the water looked like a great serpent and always reminded me
of folk-stories our nursemaids used to tell us surreptitiously—about “water
snakes, people of the river,” creatures employed by sorcerers; denizens of
dark holes in the reeds who had the power to mesmerize and “draw you
into the deep.”
   Excitement mounted, for we were approaching a landmark indeed and
the olden migrations rose again in our minds. As we reached the bridge
and drove slowly along it, we looked from side to side at the waters spread¬
ing on to the dunes on either side. A hush fell on us all. We had now left


                                              Bus Journey to Tsolo      ♦   279
the territory of /£‘u;<2Ngqika, were now in The Great House of Xhosaland
—kwaGc aleka.”
 My neighbour was moved to cry out, “O, thus-we-arrive, komKhulu!"
She became so excited that the infant woke at last, stirred, then struggled
out of its nest of the heavy shawl. Its mother now took the stage, started
to speak about her life and experiences. The opening sentences marked her
out immediately as a species of “New Woman,” partly broken away from
the society that bred her; independent, fierce, unabashed. She fumbled
quickly—clearly a highly strung person—in a small bundle tied round with
a handkerchief, brought out a sandwich, began to stuff pieces of it in the
child’s mouth. It started to eat contentedly, though still sleepy and dazed.
She addressed the passengers.
  “This is a child that I have ‘picked up,’ an illegitimate treasure. Treasure
because this was my third., and thank God that I conceived a second girl.
And I am bringing her home, to Gcaleka-land.”
  We were very startled. Everyone looked at her expressionlessly, follow¬
ing the custom of “hearing the speaker out.” For a moment she was silent,
assembling her “speech.” While we waited only the older, maternal, con¬
verted woman made a sound. She moaned, then clucked her tongue in dis¬
tress. When she did it a second time, the speaker cried,11 Mama, you would
not be shocked if you knew the obstacles that I have overcome in this Vale
of Tears.” She must have sensed that the scriptural overtone would not fail
to stay the old lady. Then she addressed everyone on board, “Here is how
it all began. I was a young girl; proper; virginal. I was courted. But the
suitor ‘changed his mind—wandala.'"
   There was an outbreak of clucks expressing everybody’s shock.
Encouraged by the response, she repeated herself for emphasis, raising her
voice; a crescendo of pain, “Rejected me, I say. Even renounced the cattle
he had already produced in part towards the contract. That was how utterly
I was rejected. Found he did not want me after all. Saw another. Oh, the
matter was discussed at home and intermediaries hurried to and fro; his
father, ashamed, mine insulted. ‘Kwakubi—Things became hideous.' But
he no longer wanted this MaFaku, this MaNyawuza whose story you are
hearing today.”
  Again she played on our sympathies by drawing on the clan names for
they established her as someone who “belonged to people"—who prized
her. The salutations gave the family an identity and at once we felt for
them; no need to know who they were.
   “From that moment, how could I trust a man? My heart was not bro¬
ken—it was rent. I had loved that suitor. I lay in my hut and sickened.
When at last I emerged, thin, thin, I ‘betook myself to the River’; washed;
scrubbed; anointed my body. Then made it known to my father that I had
‘“gathered myself together’ and must go forth. For me, the land of my
birth, this beautiful Gcaleka had gone black. I went.”
   “Went? Where?”


280   ♦   1960s and 1970s
  “‘Ndaziyel’ edolophini—Took myself to town. Worked.’ I tried many jobs.
First I became a nurse-girl; kept my eyes on the cook as she did her work.
And how she helped me to learn, improve myself, that mama who cooked for
those Europeans. She was a widow, z/MaNtande by salutation, from
Tembuland. Never will I forget her. I got a job as a cook. My Europeans ate
well, liked my work for I assure you I have skill for that job. When I cook, I
‘hit that stove,’ man, until Europeans lie on their sides replete. And they pay
their staff, those Europeans of mine, unlike some who squeeze your essence
but reckon your body must manufacture it unstoked-up by them. Years
passed. The heart mended. At last I stopped thinking of that suitor. But also
came to entertain thoughts of no others. My next step was to provide for my
old age, for I had decided to be a Nongendi—(a ‘not-marry’—-the term for a
nun). I conceived a baby as provision for that future. Yes, just ‘picked it up.’
No marriage, cattle, nothing. A little nameless thing. My Europeans let me
continue working until almost the birth. And to my joy it was a girl. While
I suckled of course I could not work, Europeans not liking the smell of nurs¬
ing mothers. Yet had to live, had I not? I could not go home, not having told
them of the path I had chosen, and fearing their wrath and distress. So I set
up with a masihlalisane. Yes, took up with that life of no life. For more than
a year, I was a kephita—(kept woman). But guess what happened next.
Having weaned, I was about to return to my Europeans. But one-two-three,
I had conceived again. Yet no longer wanting to kephita with that man
because he had begun to want to make a permanency of that no-life arrange¬
ment. Huh! A man with wife and children in the country—what would I
ever be to him? Did he not merely want a permanent ‘wife’ but without cat¬
tle, contract, licence, one denied a place in society? Such was his cheek. Yet
my Europeans wanted me back and I too wanted work.”
  The elderly woman murmured as if involuntarily, “Ah, when one gets
good employers and good work, what else to do but cling to it? Clutch such
a job, ‘dig the digits into it till fingernails sink to the very quicks.'"
   That drew groans of assent and the younger woman turned to her, say¬
ing, “That is what I have learnt to do. Yet this fix of another pregnancy was
preventing me. Finally I could only send word to my flesh and blood and
take my girl-child home to the Transkei, deposit her with my mother to
raise up. Painful, but a grandchild is precious. Do not even shameful,
nameless ones bring their own load of love and consolation? I am on my
way to visit that child.
  “But that unwanted pregnancy resulted in a boy and, as you can imag¬
ine, the father wished to have it because it was a man-child. Produced the
necessary cattle to my people for the fine for spoiling me, and therefore
took his son.”
   “Kwekf' cried Jola at last, dejected by every aspect of the case. But she cried
sharply, “No, Jola, I did not feel deprived. What use are boys to such as me?
It is gzVZ-children who support their mother when she grows old and useless.
Boys of nowadays have other fish to fry. Now here is my life’s plan: Every time


                                               Bus Journey to Tsolo       ♦   281
I conceive a boy, I will let the father produce the fine in cattle to my people—which
will entitle him to take the child into his lineage group! But I will conceal each
girl, whisk her away to the home of my birth. These are my gold,” she cried,
suddenly lifting the infant on high. “My heart is rent no more when I con¬
template them.” She sat back, cuddled her baby and was silent.
   But her words describing that life’s plan left us dazed. Yet had she not
shown that she felt no self-pity? Need we feel it for her? But the cynicism,
the anti-social aspect, the amorality of it affected everybody; not so much
the personal case but its wide implications. Jola took over. We had to strain
our ears to hear him. His voice was low and solemn.
  “People-of-ours, a painful thing is taking place in our life.” He paused.
The silence was marked only by noises from the baby who seemed to have
catarrh, breathing stertorously while munching the bits of sandwich. Jola
expressed himself, and I am almost “defeated,” as he would have said, by
trying now to put it in English.
      “Kaloku tina esiNtwini sasuka sa PUMA enkonzweni yokuhlonipa intombi;
this painful thing of which I speak is that ‘we-of-our-culture Bade Farewell
to our former reverence for virginity.’” He heightened the key words by
adding those catalysts that have no equivalent in English: Kaloku,
ukusuka—the “Deficients,” technically so-called, that give what the gram¬
marian W. G. Bennie has described as “a snap to the action,” and in prose
can shift meanings and thought patterns to the level of intensity that a poet
can achieve in English verse. Jola’s remark forced you to contemplate the
disaster on many levels; to consider the setting we lived in; the vicissitudes
that involved all the people; and to ask yourself what could be the outcome
of the changes being wrought in the nation. Many of us now looked to him
as one whose experience might offer an answer, or at least some consolation.
But having thrown the idea among us like a man broadcasting seed he said
no more. It was the matron who spoke, her voice as sad as his.
   “We mourn the passing of the days when girls behaved nobly because the
community so behaved,” she said. “Society was strict with itself, therefore strict
with them for they were its symbol of honour. At intervals girls had to be
examined lest they had been deflowered despite the vigilance of the chaper¬
one. Present generations feel that this was crude. But we were a rough peo¬
ple. Nobility does not presuppose queasy petty sensitivities. That attitude
belongs to isiLungu—Europeanness. It is not related to the sensibility which
belonged to isiNtu—Africanness; which was what we strove after, even if
indelicate, crude. The ideal of nobility-in-living-with-people was served by,
among other things, society’s demand that a man who transgressed the code
about virgins be disgraced, disgraced! The matter had to do with the symbols
of our self-respect. Where now that striving, and what use a community that
abandons even the outward symbols of its thought?” The Pondo braves shifted
their knobkerries uneasily as if the reference to transgressions struck near the
bone. I would have liked to say what I thought but didn’t. It would have been
out of place for me to comment. People began gathering up parcels and


282    ♦   1960s and 1970s
belongings. We reached the sleepy-looking town, built on the site of the
kraal, or “Great Place” of the Gcaleka Paramount Chief Hintsa, who had
reigned when Europeans first penetrated into Xhosaland. The bus stopped
and many disembarked. Those of us who were going on said good-bye and
watched the new-comers about to join us. I stepped out with other passen¬
gers to stretch my legs. When it was time to climb back into the bus, old Jola
followed behind me. As he went to his seat he scrutinized faces; exchanged a
word with those who had been with us from the beginning; hailed new-com¬
ers. He had to halt when I reached my seat because my neighbour had risen
and stepped aside into the corridor, child in arms, in order to let me pass
through to my corner. But when she sat down, he still stood looking down at
her as if worried about something. I hoped he would not start all over again
on the subjects she had raised. When he spoke, it was in stentorian tones,
throwing his voice dramatically as everybody did, and demanded:
    K’awutsho, MaNyawuza: le bus imile nje kodwa umchamisile umntana,
wazithuma? - Kindly say, I beg, MaNyawuza: this bus having stopped and
afforded the opportunity, did you piss that child and make sure her bowels
moved?’” His labourer’s face wore a look of real concern, of a parent, prob¬
ably grandfather, putting the question to a frank and far from queasy or
prettily sensitive audience. They judged it entirely proper, echoed it vigor¬
ously, and looked at the mother for assurance.
   I was delighted not to have missed that exchange. It seemed to strike a
note appropriate to my coming interlude in yet another setting within the
society we had talked about throughout the ride. Rough the journey had
been in all conscience: bucolic, uncouth, odoriferous, inconvenient; but
also lacking none of the elements my father had promised: reciprocity,
tough-mindedness, imagination, the irrepressible sense of fun.




          “Segametsi Molefe, ” “Banabotlhe Kuoena
                 and “Matshediso Moeng, ”
                Three Court Statements
                            Botswana 1964       Setswana


Under British rule, the kgotla came to be known as the “Native Tribunal.” Women
could attend kgotla only as witnesses or litigants in cases such as divorce, adultery,
infanticide, and abortion. One could, however, appeal to the Magistrate’s Court
against the findings of this tribunal. The three statements selected here give direct
voice in a public record to ordinary women presenting their cases within the lim¬
itations of male-run colonial and tribal administrations. In the interests of privacy,
none of the parties’ real names are used here.
   Segametsi Mlolefe acknowledges that she was drunk at the time the defendant
“came under [her] blankets,” but she nevertheless understands that she was raped.
Hence, she fetched the headman (chief’s representative) as the first step to bringing

                                             Three Court Statements           ♦   283
the case to court. Her statement was made in Setswana and translated in court; the
original is unfortunately not available.
   The next two statements concern cases of infanticide. Banabotlhe Kwena
reminds the court that she did not become pregnant by herself and that she is thus
not solely responsible for the death of the infant. Her repeated—and veiled—accu¬
sations against Phologotswana Ramasedi stand in contrast to Matshediso Moeng’s
apology at the end of her statement, in which she expresses both remorse and fear
of her father. In Botswana society, children are expected to express reverence for
their parents. About Moeng’s case, the prosecutor writes, “Am not pressing for
heavy punishment particularly but consider it my duty to point out that offences of
this nature, and abortions, are becoming prevalent amongst young women. Would
like to see some salutory sentence imposed but do not ask for anything excessive.”
                                                                     Mary Lederer


                                        ♦

Segametsi Molefe (27 July 1964)
I am Segametsi Molefe. I live in Molepolole. I remember July 21st. I woke
up during the night and found accused sleeping with me. I found that he
had taken off my clothes, and that the petticoat I was wearing was wet.
When I woke up, I found he was holding my neck. He was fully dressed,
as he is now. I know the accused. I used to see him. He had carnal inter¬
course with me without my consent. When I went to sleep, I was alone. He
came later and came under my blankets. I did not wake up when he came
into the house. I was drunk. I did not know what happened.
  When I woke up, I went to call Balekanye to come and see the accused.
He is a Headman. I told him the accused had raped me.

Banabotlhe Kwena (7 October 1964)
I wish to say that I was impregnated by PHOLOGOTSWANA RAMASEDI.
Phologotswana gave me some pills to swallow which I did. Phologotswana
had told me that if I took the pills the unborn child would die and I agreed
to take the pills so that the child should die.
  I took the pills on a Friday and the following day—Saturday—the child was
still-born. I buried the dead child at my mother’s court-yard and I was alone.


Matshediso Moeng (16 November 1964)
I have nothing to say really except to ask for forgiveness. (In answer to
Court.) I am sorry it happened. I was frightened because of my father’s
anger. If I had given birth to that baby he would have turned me out of the
house. I have a child three years old whose father is in Rhodesia. I do not
expect to see him again. When this baby was born my father was very
angry. He had often said he would throw me out if I had another child.
The father of the child I have now killed is in Johannesburg.


                                            Transcriber and translator unknown


284   ♦   1960s AND 1970s
                              Jane Chifamba,
            The Widow and the Baboons
                           Zimbabwe 1964        chiShona

Jane Chifamba was in 1964 the first woman to be published in chiShona. A dedi¬
cated teacher who was aware of the need to preserve traditional tales for future
generations, she found herself the victim of male discouragement and ridicule
when she wrote her collection of folktales, Ngano Dzepasi Chigare (Stories of Olden
Days). “Why do you waste so much paper—writing on so much paper? . . . We can
put it to better use in rolling our cigarettes!” said the men, according to Chifamba
in a 1990 interview with Fiona Lloyd at a women artists’ conference held in
H arare. Her collection of folktales reflects little modification of the traditional
tales. They have a characteristic opening “Rare kare, kwaiva . . .” (Long ago / Once
upon a time there was . . . ). The end of each story is signaled by the statement,
 “Ndipo pakagumira sarungano" (the story ends here). Direct speech reinforces the
 individuality of each character in the story, and a song ensures the participation of
 the audiences in each tale. The black-and-white drawings that accompany each
 story are lively, add a touch of humor, and match the text closely. Perhaps
 Chifamba wanted the children to be read to and shown pictures by an adult.
    “The Widow and the Baboons” draws our attention to the plight of widows
 who were, and sometimes still are, deprived of inheritances and victimized on the
 deaths of their husbands. Besides being entertaining, teaching the art of language,
 and deepening experience, folktales were valued for developing a strong moral
 sense in the young. “The Widow and the Baboons” has all these qualities.
    Chifamba had not published anything else when she died in 1996.
                                                                  Chiedza Musengezi
                                          ♦

Once upon a time when the world was young there lived a man and his wife
who unfortunately had no children, and when the man died his relatives came
and took everything that her husband had left her. They left her suffering. She
had neither clothes nor food, so she started to beg for a living. Those who were
generous gave her food and clothes. One day she came to the home of a black¬
smith who pitied her and decided to give her something that would help her
for a long time. He gave her a hoe and told her to use it to get food. He wanted
to find out whether it was laziness that had made the woman a beggar.
   The widow thanked the blacksmith and went to the village headman to
ask for a piece of land. She was given a field in a vlei where no other crops
would grow except tsenza and rice, so she went home and looked for seeds in
the bag where she put all the things that she had received from people. She
found a few tsenza seeds, cultivated her field in the vlei, and planted them.
   Now her field was next to a hill which was the home of some baboons.
These baboons were a menace to people with fields near the hill, but now

                                        The Widow and the Baboons             ♦   285
the widow’s field became a shield to all the other fields. The baboons tor¬
mented her, for they came to dig up her tsenza and she had to spend most
of her time guarding her crops.
  When the tsenza were ready to be harvested she dug them up bit by bit
and took them home where she exchanged them for maize and rapoko.
While she was harvesting she didn’t take her hoe home every day but
would hide it because she couldn’t carry both the hoe and the tsenza. When
the baboons saw that her field was no longer guarded they came down
from the hill to look for any left over tsenza, and while they were there a
big baboon discovered the hidden hoe. He took it and used it to dig up the
tsenza. He also made sure that he hid it in a place where he alone could
find it, and every day when the baboons came to dig up the tsenza with
their hands, the big one would use the hoe.
  When the widow next came to her field to dig up more of her crop she
couldn’t find her hoe. She realized that the baboons had taken it. And at
the same time the baboons decided that since there was not much food left
here they had better look for another field to rob. They set off along the
road that the woman used when going to her field. Very soon they met her
and of course she asked them about her hoe. She asked each one of them
as they passed her, for they walked in single file with the youngest in front
and the oldest at the back. And as she asked them she sang a song to which
each of the baboons replied, and their voices ran together like this:


            You are guilty—liar. You are guilty.
            Yawiri yawiri1—you are guilty—liar
            Yawiri yawiri—you are guilty—liar
            Have you not seen—you are guilty—liar
            The hoe I borrowed—you are guilty—liar


            I wouldn’t take—you are guilty—liar
            A hoe that you borrowed—you are guilty—liar
            I swear—you are guilty—liar
            By my child Zimbabwe—you are guilty—liar
            Whom I left in Chitsunge—you are guilty—liar
            Where we used to eat tsungwe—you are guilty—liar
            Kabwa kabwa kuchu uku gwande
            Koromoka chiromo chafunda
            Mhuno dzangu dzina murindira.2


As each baboon said kabwa kabwa kuchu uku gwande it would shake itself
and roll on the ground to show that it was not hiding anything. When it was
the big baboon’s turn he tried to do what the others had done, but the blade
of the hoe, which he had removed from the handle and hidden in his armpit,
fell to the ground with a clattering sound, and he ran away in shame.
  The widow picked up her hoe and went back home. She later married


286   ♦   1960s AND 1970s
the blacksmith who had seen how clever and industrious she was, and they
lived happily ever after.
   The story ends here.

   1. Nonsense onomatopoeic words.
   2. These last three lines are for onomatopoeic effect only, although the associations
of meaning lend to the sense of contusion.

                                    Translated by James Mahlaule and M. Furusa




                 Princess Magogo kaDinuzulu,
                Ballad of Nomagundwane
                            South Africa 1964       isiZulu


The version of this song printed here was sung by Princess Magogo and recorded
by David Rycroft in 1964; she had also sung it for him on three other occasions.
It was performed as a solo with the singer accompanying herself on the ugubhu
(musical bow) and follows a well-established tradition of solitary love songs sung
by girls and young women. Often they are songs of longing because of separation,
but this one has its own special characteristics. It has a long ballad-narrative qual¬
ity that is not found in other typically far shorter love songs, and its great age
makes it particularly interesting. Princess Magogo, as a daughter of the royal Zulu
household, spent much time as a young girl in the company of the wives of her
father Dinuzulu and her grandfather Cetshwayo kaMpande; she heard the ballad
from one of Cetshwayo’s wives. It may have been composed in the mid-nineteenth
century in the long period of stability when Mpande was king. Certainly it gives
no hint of great social disturbance and focuses completely on the settled domestic
domain and affairs of courtship, love, and lost love.
  The narrative sets a story within a story, as the singer tells her tale of rejection
to her younger sister, Nomagundwane (Miss Rats). What shines through the text
is the intensity of the teller’s emotion, her desire to be part of her chosen one’s
family, her tension as she arrives and is greeted by her lover’s mother—who will
not kiss her as “her mouth is sore.” She is then greeted by her rather enigmatic
lover, feels final bitter disappointment, and makes an abrupt departure when she
realizes that against all her expectations she has been sidelined for someone else,
the second arrival, the girl who is, unlike her, kissed in greeting by the mother of
the homestead. The theatrical nature of the ballad’s telling is also interesting. The
narrative is carried forward largely through dialogue and slowly, almost like a film
going into slow motion as the entrances, gestures, and greetings are highlighted in
sequence. The contrast between the singer’s reception and that of “Miss Favourite”
makes clear the feelings of the mother of the homestead. And finally the ballad
focuses on the far more opaque feelings of the son, the beloved.
   David Rycroft notes that the artistry of the performer is brought into play with
each presentation, and that points of diction and phrasing, and techniques such as
the extent to which Miss Rats is addressed, varied with each performance he heard.
Thus the ballad’s textuality is not finally rendered by the version we have here.
                                                       Liz Gunner and Mary Lederer


                                             Ballad of Nomagundwane             ♦   287
                                          ♦

  Alas! Woe is me!1
      Oh, what sorrow, Nomagundwane!
      Bring me my ugubhu musical bow in the hut there, O my younger sister!
      I have been travelling, O sister;
      Eventually I reached the homestead;
  I found the young men’s hut closed;
  I opened it and entered;
  I drew out a sitting-mat and sat down, O sister.
  Then some people entered;
  And they greeted me;
  And I reciprocated, O sister.
  Then in came my boy-friend;
  He said to me: “Greetings, child of ours!”
  And I reciprocated, O sister;
  He said: “Is it still going well at home?”
  I replied: “Yes, they have sent greetings”;
  And we sat with the people.
  Then [his] mother came in;
      She said to me: “Good day, my child!”
  And then I reciprocated, O sister;
      She said to me: “I shall not kiss you, my child”;
  She said: “My mouth is sore.”
  Having said that, the mother went out.
  Then in came Miss “Favourite girl”;
  And she knelt further up than me;
  They drew out a sitting-mat for you and you sat down, O Miss Favourite!
  You were greeted by your boy-friend;
  And you reciprocated, O Miss Favourite;
  And then the people greeted you;
  And you reciprocated, O Miss Favourite;
  And then I greeted you, O Miss Favourite;
  And you reciprocated, Miss Favourite.
  Then in came the mother;
  She entered with a well-kept spare blanket;
  She was now wearing a shawl;
  She greeted you, O Miss Favourite;
  And you reciprocated, Miss Favourite;
  She said: “Fet me kiss you, my child!”
  And you were kissed, O Miss Favourite.
  Then her son asked a question;
  He said: “Why do you k^iss only this one?”
  And she said: “I no longer know her, my child.”
  Once again her son asked;


288     ♦   1960s and 1970s
  Saying: “Oh, but do you know this one?”
  And she said: “She is someone from nearby, my child.”
  Then darkness fell, as is inevitable;
  Alas, O mountains! Night fell, as is inevitable;
  Alas, O my father! Darkness fell, as it inevitably does!
  Then we lay down to sleep, O Miss Favourite.
  Then dawn broke, as is inevitable;
  It dawned, it dawned, inevitably;
  Alas, then came the dawn, as it inevitably comes.
  Then we said: “We are leaving.”
  And then some people came in;
  And we came out and went on our way;
  Then my boy-friend came after;
  And he said: “Bring that girl back with you, little sister!”
  As for me, I said: “I am just seeing off someone else.”
  Then we returned with his sister;
  We arrived at the young men’s hut.
   His sister drew out a calabash container, and left;
   Saying to me: “Let us go and wash!”
  We went to wash, and came back;
  We entered the young men’s hut.
   His sister came, bringing water;
  And she went out again.
  She came in with some food, it was brought covered up;
   I started to uncover it;
   And I cried out: “Oh, but it is thick milk!”
   I said: “Please call my ‘child’ for me!”
   I kissed my “child”
   And then I removed my bead necklace and put it on her;
   I said: “Goodbye, my child!”
   I took off my girdle, and threw it over her shoulders;
   I took my personal belongings and placed them on her shoulders;
   I came out, crying: “Now he has spurned me!”
   I cried: “Woe, O my father. Today he has spurned me!”
   I cried out: “Woe, O mountains! Now he has spurned me indeed!”
   Alas, O people! As for me, he has now spurned me!

   1. This line is repeated by the singer before each subsequent line, thereby creating a
series of couplets throughout the song.


                                      Transcribed and translated by David Rycroft




                                             Ballad of Nomagundwane              ♦   289
      Bessie Head, FOR “NAPOLEON BONAPARTE,”
                          Jenny, and Kate
                            Botswana 1965       English


Bessie Head’s pathbreaking writing acquired the accolades it deserves mainly after
her death in 1986. A South African by birth, Head wrote her best-known works
in Botswana, where she lived from the age of twenty-seven. She was the child of a
black father and white mother who, separated from her daughter shortly after giv¬
ing birth, died in a mental institution. The traumatic effects of the law that made
interracial sexual unions illegal in South Africa, and that led to Head’s painful
experiences of homelessness, are extensively explored in her fiction and prolific
correspondence.
   Head’s posthumously published The Cardinals is the only novel she set in South
Africa and offers an explanation of why the author found her birthplace so cre¬
atively debilitating. Three of her novels set in Botswana explicitly draw on autobi¬
ographical experiences: When Rain Clouds Gather is based on her stay on a
Botswanan development farm; Maru, focusing on a woman schoolteacher deemed
racially inferior by the Batswana, reconfigures Head’s sense of her own subordina¬
tion and exclusion; and in A Question of Power, a novel that has prompted lively
critical interest, Head explores unconscious processes from the perspective of a
character’s experience of acute psychological distress. In later works, Serowe:
Village of the Rainwind, A Bewitched Crossroad, and many of the short stories in The
Collector of Treasures, Head deals mainly with the history and cultural ethos of
Botswana and especially Serowe, the village in which she settled.
   The piece offered here was written before 1965, when it was submitted to The
New African. It was, however, published in the Southern African Review of Books
only in 1990. Fusing essay and short story conventions in ways that often charac¬
terize Head’s eclectic writing, it anticipates her intricate explorations of interper¬
sonal relationships in later works. Avoiding categorical interpretations of
individual subjectivity and social relationships, she dwells on the spiritual, psycho¬
logical, and individual complexities that shape human experiences. She often
stresses, for example, the ambiguities of characters in positions of authority. Like
her character Napoleon Bonaparte, the figures of great men that recur in her short
writings and in novels like Maru and A Question of Powers mbody a baffling com¬
bination of malevolence toward others, emotional vulnerability, and visionary
insight. Head is also concerned with the undercurrents of encounters and personal
feelings that are seemingly ordinary and straightforward. Her compelling visions
of freedom emanate from a determined imaginative invention of “new worlds.”
                                                                        Desiree' Lewis


                                         ♦

The last night I spent in that little village in Bechuanaland was perhaps
the most bitter and the most lonely hour of my life. There was a central
part of the village with four shops, a post office and a garage. The sun was
just setting. I sat on the steps of the post office and my feet were buried in
the thick loose dust of the road. I thought perhaps that the red-streaked


290 ♦ 1960s and 1970s
sunset might shout an answer at last so I concentrated my mind silently
and steadfastly on it for a long time. But the twilight puffed itself away and
the peaked roofs of the mud huts became sharp black silhouettes against
the sky. A goat stepped jauntily down the road. It eyed some orange peels
lying about my feet and thinking that I must be a part of the stone on
which I sat, it nuzzled roughly about my legs to get at the peels.
  I stood up and sauntered slowly back to my mud hut that had been
home for nearly a year. Everything that had meant Africa to me had been
contained in a small semi-desert village in the wild thorn bush country of
Bechuanaland. It seemed I had been born anew that year. Then I lost that
centre of gravity. There is no continuity in the life of a refugee. You are
here today and gone tomorrow. It may be just that I am not really a
refugee. I cannot bear it. I only know that I had a little money and an
unbearable pain; that I could not get a passport; that I am not anybody’s
stooge or spy or agent. Still I was entangled in the snarls and hazards of
refugeeism. Entangled to the point that now I do not know where I am or
what I am doing. I am alive but it may be that I sit in someone’s lunatic
asylum. I mean, I could not have a normal mind now because everything is
strange and unknown. Nothing leads on to something else. Only the past
is vividly alive and I traverse it over and over again.
   The police constable, Peto, brought me the letter. In a way he was my
friend as I had stayed at his house when I first arrived in the village. I later
learnt that he was much distrusted. He really loved British authority. It
made sense to him. He was very tall and fat with huge popping eyes that
rolled and slided away from a direct glance. He always waited three sec¬
onds before laughing at a joke perhaps mentally checking up if the author¬
ities would approve. He had an odd tone when speaking English. He rolled
words around on his tongue the way people do who come from America.
   “Hullo, Mr Peto,” I said. “How are you?”
   He laughed “Har, har” and rolled his eyes away.
   “A’m all right,” he drawled. “Ah have some bad noos for you.”
   He handed me the letter. It read:


      Dear Madam,
       We regret to inform you that your application for a resident permit has
   been unsuccessful.
      Your obedient servant. . .


   I looked at Peto carefully. Maybe he would help me with a bit of sym¬
pathy. But he kept his face blank; only his big eyes rolled round and round.
   “What does this mean?” I asked.
   “It means you cannot stay here,” and he shrugged his whole body.
   “But how do I get away from here? I have no travel papers. I m a non¬
political refugee. It’s a relay system. Political refugees in Dar-Es-Salaam
vouch for those coming on behind. Then you get an identity paper that lets


                                        For “Napoleon Bonaparte”         ♦   291
you through Zambia. It’s very top level like a V.I.P. I’m just an ordinary
person.”
   He clucked sympathetically.
   “We can give you a travel paper,” he said.
   I laughed: “You folks of Bechuanaland are behaving as though Bechuana-
land’s in the Mediterranean Sea. You don’t know anything about Africa. It
changes every day. Besides, its always looking for spies of the South African
government. Since you folks here are so buddy-buddy with those folks down
there do you think Tanzania would look at a Bechuanaland travel document?”
   “Har, har,” he laughed. “You chased your troubles this way. We didn’t ask
for it.”
   He only spoke like that because the British made him feel safe. There
weren’t any newspapers circulating in Bechuanaland that would have shown
him quite clearly that some dreadful calamity could make the British and
their little island disappear overnight. There were too many agents of des¬
tiny around with their intense private causes and they were dealing blows
left and right. No one was safe; not even an anonymous individual in an
anonymous village in the wilderness of Africa.
  “Well, well, that’s that,” I said.
   “Governments want everyone to get going these days; so, I’ll get going.”
   Peto adopted a confidential tone.
  “You could have got a resident permit easy. Just like that! Only because you
were friendly with that Jenny woman. She was poison to the authorities.”
   I looked at him indignantly yet half wanting to laugh at the same time.
I raised my voice to a shout.
   “Well if they aren’t giving me a resident permit because of my friend¬
ship with Jenny then the rotten buggers can keep their bribery and cor¬
ruption.”
  “Shush! Shush!” Peto said anxiously.
   I waved my hands: “The Republic of South Africa where I come from is
a pretty rotten country but no white man there ever succeeded in making
a black man an enemy of a black man! We made up our own minds about
that! The Motswana of Bechuanaland is captivated by British treachery!”
   Peto got up and fled. It wasn’t the kind of talk a good, obedient civil ser¬
vant should listen to. I had a good laugh on Peto but then I could have cried
too. At least he’d have a good chance of staying in Africa. Bechuanaland
was his home. I had no home. On the wall of my mud hut I had pasted a
piece of paper in big bold capitals:


                                   AFRICA


  Underneath I had written:
  “Africa does not need me but I need Africa.”
  It had seemed then tha^t I could not live without Africa. I was right. I
don’t live now.


292 ♦ 1960s AND 1970s
The trouble with the political and non-political refugees from the Republic
of South Africa is that we cannot really be tolerated in the independent
African states. Were so outdated. Information about what is going on just
does not get through via sea and air routes and through magazines, news¬
papers and books. It travels overland by word of mouth and sort of gets into
the air. Thus the interpretations are often confused and erroneous. Previous
to 1958 no one had heard of Padmore and Pan-Africanism and yet it had
been going on all the time in London. Previous to 1958 everyone was a
Marxist- Leninist or Stalinist or Trotskyite. Then after 1958 a few of us
became Pan-Africanists though there is much doubt as to whether the lat¬
ter would ever take hold there. I can mention an experience. After reading
George Padmore’s book my whole manner of speaking and thinking and
walking changed. It totally unsuited me for living in such a climate and
environment as South Africa. It gave me a new skin and a new life that was
totally unacceptable to conditions down there. To survive with this new life
I had to remove myself. Doctrines such as Marxist-Leninism seem pecu¬
liarly suited to suit an environment like that. They stress the universal man;
at least, the Marxist-Leninists and co. are very hostile to Pan-Africanism
which is an attempt to establish a strong type of African personality.
Anyway Marxist-Leninism has survived for almost a century in South
Africa. I do not know much about it except that I have gained the impres¬
sion that it is formidably intellectual, exact, scientific with all the answers
worked out beforehand. It’s a kind of quick method to over-coming the
inferiority complex whereas Pan-Africanism reveals how dreadfully over¬
inflicted with inferior-complex and insecure an African of Africa can be.
Pan-Africanism is certainly the more difficult road of the two. It’s a kind of
something leading on to something else along an unknown path. It would
have been deeply satisfying to me had I been allowed to live in Africa.
Everything of Africa would have been a guide, a tip, a hint, a clue. There
wasn’t anything in that little village that a historian would care to write
about. The whole way of life seemed rather like some dark age in time mov¬
ing dreamily within itself. Yet aspects of its life began to grow on me like
patches of cloth—instead of a cup, the carved-out husk of a calabash would
be used for scooping water out of a pail. Outside stoves and ovens were built
of mud; porches and houses of mud. The fierce November thunderstorm
would wash all the mud away but women with patient hands would again
build up all their mud necessities. And because I was poor I too became a
part of this mud life and a part of the hungry goats that lived off the
windswept papers scattered about.
  I had been living in the village for five months before I met Jenny. She
was the only other refugee than myself who drifted inland. Others hung
about in towns and villages near the main railway line for lifts out of the ter¬
ritory. As we were both from South Africa it was inevitable that we should
drift together. I had never heard about her in the newspapers or anything but
in Bechuanaland she had made a notorious reputation for herself. She was


                                        For “Napoleon Bonaparte”         *   293
on a big top-secret organising project that was a supreme mystery. She was
in the centre of some well-informed inner circle and I do believe she had
divided the whole of Bechuanaland into her inner and outer circles; because,
apart from organising her own top-secret project she also flung herself into
the subtle and extremely treacherous maze of Bechuanaland politics. The
only comparison to the complexity of Bechuanaland politics is Nigerian
politics. They have all the evils of human society—-poverty, illiteracy and
disease; corruption and bribery, etc., but they do not want to bow down to
the one party government or the Marxist-Leninist solution. This infuriates
people who have dedicated their lives to the elimination of poverty, illiter¬
acy, disease, bribery and corruption. Jenny could not understand how the
illiterate peasants had gone and voted for the chiefs who were hand in
glove with the British oppressor when she had organised the whole oppo¬
sition into doing hut to hut campaigns. All around it was a very strange
election. The chiefs never made an appearance. They had a kind of
Napoleon Bonaparte with a sullen, intense, magnetic personality and a
spell-binding effect on a crowd. This Napoleon Bonaparte was convinced
unshakeably about three things: that Communism and Pan-Africanism are
no damn good; that change is unnecessary but if it is to come it should
come along the right channels—through the chiefs; that refugees should all
be put in jail or thrown to the hungry lions roaming about the outskirts of
the village.


Napoleon Bonaparte frightened everybody. It was just their luck that the
British and the chiefs had him on their side. If he had been on the side of
the Communists and Pan-Africanists he would have swayed the vote their
way. He could do as he pleased with a crowd of simple villagers. He also
spoke with a power and authority all his own. He could be dramatic, tragic,
emotional, persuasive, aloof, endearingly charming—turning on each mood
as he pleased; just doing as he pleased with vigorous masculine abandon. The
women were crazy about him. Women rushed to register for the party of the
chiefs. Women, just by temperament and instinct love^ power and masculin¬
ity in a man. It was very shrewdly done. They kept Napoleon Bonaparte
working on the inland villages and they swept all these villages with a stun¬
ning majority. They lost the towns near the railway line where poverty, illit¬
eracy and disease are discussed in a sophisticated manner. The strange thing
about Napoleon Bonaparte was that he declined a high government post.
People said it was because he was really treated like a dog by the chiefs. He
did all the dirty work but they kept him out of their inner circle. People said
it was because he was not “upper-class.” He had a bad habit of drinking
heavily and then falling down stiff like a board. He was also over-fond of the
company of prostitutes and he also made white people uncomfortable—
there was something too yiolent, brutal, earthy and direct about him that
shattered their delicately-bred demeanours. The chief’s party worked in
close collaboration with the most delicately-bred British demeanours.


294   ♦   1960s AND 1970s
  Anyway Napoleon Bonaparte was poison to Jenny. It was inevitable. He
was about campaigning and so was she—both on the wrong side of the
fence according to the other. It was Jenny who inspired in Napoleon
Bonaparte an undying hatred for refugees. He wasn’t the kind of man who
could hate a woman but he hated Jenny and then he hated all refugees irre¬
spective of sex. They were out to upset the status quo and he was a firm
supporter of the status quo. He could be anything he liked but he wanted
the status quo to stay the status quo. Any real change from the top would
have created chaos and disorder in his view. It is undoubted that Napoleon
Bonaparte wanted power himself. He wanted to get control of something
as a release; an outlet for the intense drives within him but the great cause
that would channel his feverish energy, had not, until the time I left made
its appearance. Napoleon Bonaparte smouldered. One day he would burst
into flame. He would. There was a tremendous power drive in him and a
ruthless and unswerving concentration.
   There is a wild frustration in me when I think of him. He wanted some¬
thing from me or wanted to tell me something but he never approached.
He never once spoke to me. He had a way of catching hold of my eye so
that I could distinctly feel the penetration and the look boring down into
some unknown depths. And I could never release my eyes until he would
turn away abruptly and walk off. He would always catch me off-guard. I’d
turn around a hedge and there he’d be walking towards me and he’d just
lock my eyes up and I’d never have the power to pull them away. Then he’d
just brush past and the atmosphere would almost shout aloud with vio¬
lence. Once I greeted him and his reply was a sharp, fierce sound that
caused my heart to palpitate in extreme alarm. I never tried greeting him
again. In fact I always looked around cautiously wherever I went so that I
might dash in the opposite direction should I see him approaching. I was
plain stark terrified of the man. Once I awoke during the night for a drink
of water. The water-pail was under the window. It was moonlight. I parted
the curtains on an impulse and looked out. There he stood, the moonlight
glistening on his ferocious face—the sharp straight line of the brow and
the harsh, deep lines of the mouth unsoftened by the beautiful pale light.
He had been looking with fixed concentration at the door of my hut and
then he turned his head with a slow, appealing; yet aloof and god-like ges¬
ture and looked at the window. I dropped the curtain. It seemed as though
I had lost control of my limbs. They trembled violently. I could have cried
out with the intense pain—either my heart had stopped beating or had
twisted up into a tight constricted ball.
  Perhaps, a mouse sat near the wall of a newly-built dam. They opened
the floodgates above and the water came crashing down on him in huge
shining billows.
   “This is the end,” he thought before blacking out. And yet; when he had
regained consciousness it was rather that he found he could live in a new
element. He was a water-rat. All other elements were shut out and only the


                                      For “Napoleon Bonaparte” ♦ 295
dazzling roar of the water was about, within and around him all the while.
He could not get out; escape. He even had to drink water for nourishment.
He was forever trapped by water till maybe he even became water and
could no longer care to maintain a separate identity.
      I would not even care to question whether I love or loved Napoleon
Bonaparte or whether he loves or loved me. I only know that like the
mouse I accidently, unknowingly approach a dam; not knowing there was
water up above or a terrible unfathomable mystery that would go its own
way; a power outside myself controlling and yet uncontrolled by me. That
is why I prefer to believe I am insane. I do not control my own life. I am
living and breathing. There are crowds of people all about me; yet I am
contained in a wall of silence. All attention, alertness is concentrated
within as though at some day, some time I should hear a call that would
end this strange and painful exile. It isn’t that I do not resent this helpless
condition. I resent it bitterly. At times I am overcome by a deep wave of
despair. I want my life to myself. I feel this way because I am alone now. It
wasn’t so bad while I still lived in the village. I came to accept the fact that
a powerful and subterranean current had been established between my life
and that of another human life because I was able to establish a pattern in
the sudden agitations and distress that took possession of me.


One afternoon I sat in my hut absorbed in a book. For no reason I could
fathom I flung the book aside, and paced about the hut in extreme distress
exclaiming over and over again: “Don’t worry! It does not matter! Don’t
worry about that!”
   I later learnt that a political meeting had taken place in the village and
that Napoleon Bonaparte had got himself into a mess by attacking the
Communists and Pan-Africanists. They in turn had struck a blow below
the belt by calling his mother a prostitute of the village; which was in fact
true. My friend Kate told me that tears just dashed into his eyes and he
walked abruptly away from the meeting amid much ribald laughter from
the enemy.
  “I do not like the style of those politicians,” my friend Kate said indig¬
nantly. “A secret of the village is a secret. They are bringing strange ways
into the nation. I’m not going to vote for them!”
  My friend Kate was, so to speak a typical, die-hard, tribalistic Motswana
of Bechuanaland. We lived next door to each other. I longed to tell her
about Napoleon Bonaparte and yet; I feared the whole matter would
become confused in her mind with fanatical tribal loyalty.
   She was always saying: “I shall tell you a secret of the village but if you
spread it about I’ll call you a liar and never speak to you again.”
  The tribal structure was in itself a tight closed circle, and, within this circle
were born many fierce ancj violent individualists who caused extreme distress
with their wild and wilful ways. There was a blind attitude toward these dis¬
turbers of the peace. They were punished severely by the scribes and elders who


296    ♦   1960s AND 1970s
dictated tribal justice. It was a system that contained and suppressed the misfit
by ignoring him for as long as possible until his misdeeds became of such a
nature as to really threaten the sameness and flow of life. Then the whole vil¬
lage would rise up in a turmoil and then the miscreant would be dragged
through the mud for a string of crimes committed perhaps ten, twenty years
ago. An awful lot of pretending and ignoring was done about the strange
behaviour of Napoleon. Really he was intensely feared and detested. There was
no precedent for him. Even the heroic chief Tshekedi, who had had a some¬
what eccentric behaviour pattern was quite a normal man and had been per¬
fectly comprehended. The stress today is only on the political revolution taking
place in Africa. No attention is fixed on the individuals within that revolution.
There is an insane belief that Africans of Africa are somehow a different species
of mankind. Politicians with an Oxford, Harvard education are hell-bent on
fixing us up with five-year plans as though we are mass-produced humanity
with a rubber stamp and a number and a box in which we are made for export—
a politician’s export. Some of our writers too with university degrees are writ¬
ing glib nonsense about the dancing girls as though we are a great, happy band
of child-like savages dancing our lives away in an empty, erotic frenzy.
Everything is being made for export in Africa and we are not really supposed
to care. We are not really supposed to be men and women; individualists with
a behaviour pattern all our own. We are not supposed to be like ordinary
mankind the world over, human beings of feeling, sense, intuition, reasoning,
evolving within ourselves in the smoke and fire and struggle and suffering that
is a part of the lot of all mankind. We are vulnerable and exposed victims of the
overnight ideologies of vain, conceited, dangerous cranks who would hammer
our lives into a false pattern of their own choosing. We seem to lack the men¬
tal alertness to resist these trends; the battery of propaganda that flows in from
all directions because we are within the victims of suppressive tribal institutions
and foolhardy prejudice.

It is assumed that a man begins and ends his life from the point of birth to
the point of death. How false. The point stretches infinitely backward into
the dim reaches of time and infinitely forward into unending worlds and
unending lives. One life is an hour; a stitch in the many coloured tapestry of
the universe; or, like a pebble dropped in a pool that ruffles the water and
causes ever-widening circles of movement, till maybe at some far away point
in time the movement reaches its limit and there is a stillness. I have heard
that the mathematicians are making exact calculations along these lines. It is
a comforting thought. It may be possible that one day soon we use those
mathematical calculations in Africa to rid ourselves of the soul-crippling
doctrines and ideologies that harass us so. It may be that one day, through
sheer necessity we become a continent of exact, precise calculating mathe¬
maticians and so forever rid ourselves of oppressors and foreign domination.
In some such way I am hoping that Napoleon Bonaparte will liberate him¬
self. If not he will destroy himself and I should be destroyed too.


                                         For “Napoleon Bonaparte”           *   297
      I know I should not go on and on like this about Napoleon Bonaparte and
Africa. It may bore everybody. It’s just that I have a desperate need to communi¬
cate and it may be that a stranger somewhere would comprehend my suffering
and help me. That is why I am putting down everything. Even if I am insane, at
least someone could help me to accept it and I should at least have peace of mind.
      Once I got to telling Jenny about it I plagued her almost every day. I am
surprised she tolerated me. She wasn’t the kind of woman to get involved in
“nonsense.”
      “What nonsense!” was one of her favourite phrases.
      The friends in her inner circle always said good-bye to each other with
the words: “Keep up the struggle against the imperialist, capitalist oppres¬
sors.” At first I did not even hold out a hope that I would ever be a friend
of Jenny. She reserved all warmth and frankness for her inner circle. They
were people with remarkable characteristics.
  Just as there are some people who never become stock brokers or finan¬
ciers because they are temperamentally unable to sustain the shock of the
rise and fall of the stock market; just so do political circles inspire a night¬
marish terror in me.
   “Did you hear? T. is a spy! Did you hear? J. is a spy!” and so on and so
on. They eat each other with hate.
      So I say: “To hell with you all—good, bad and sympathisers. If there
isn’t a benevolent overshadowing presence in the universe taking care of
the destinies of all men—then who am I to think I can take care of
Africa?” And because my life is one of uncertainty, pain and a strange inner
humility I wish to believe that there is a protective, all knowing force at
work among the affairs of men.


Therefore Jenny and I had some flaming rows at the beginning of our
friendship. Maybe she thought I had not got the message—that every
black man and woman was committed to the liberatory struggle hands,
feet, legs and heart. That was what it meant to her. The fact is I had got
the message but had taken off in a direction all my own.
  There is a sure-fire method of getting a convert. Deal death blows to the
ego. I got phrases like this flung at me: “You’re full of contrived confusion!
You’re an escapist! You’re an exhibitionist!”
  I’d sort of catch on to a word here and there to save myself.
  “I couldn’t possibly be an exhibitionist. I am lonely and loneliness does
not boost the ego,” I’d say.
   She gave me a book to read. It was called The Third World. It really dealt
a blow to my self esteem. I thought I could read any book in English but I
got through a couple of pages and had to go right back to page one again
because words, meaning, sentences were not connecting in my mind. In the
end I had to give up. It obviously was understood by Jenny because large sec¬
tions were heavily underlined and the word AMEN!! printed in bold capitals
in the margin throughout the book.


298    ♦   1960s and 1970s
  I returned the book feeling very mortified and embarrassed. It was the
first time a book had defeated me.
  “It’s very difficult to read,” I said.
  She laughed: “Yes it’s rather technical. I could lend you something simpler.”
  “No thanks,” I said politely. “I have something to read at home.”
  Funny thing. I had a similar experience some months later. Someone in
the village gave me a pamphlet entitled: “Consciencism—The Philosophy
for the Decolonization of Africa.”
  Though I re-read it several times words, sentences, meaning could not
connect in my mind. I felt extreme alarm. Perhaps, a form of English was
evolving that I would never comprehend. I took the pamphlet to Jenny.
  “What’s Consciencism?” I asked.
  She laughed: “Oh, that’s just one of the latest ideologies of Kwame
Nkrumah.”
  I was relieved that it could be dismissed so lightly but there was a nag¬
ging thought.
   “Is there perhaps a connection between The Third World and Conscien¬
cism?” I asked.
   She gave me a hostile stare.
   “You really have an inferior mind,” she said. “You never listen to Africa.
You just hear your own noise all the time.”
  “What do you mean?” I asked anxiously. “Is The Third World Africa or
is Consciencism Africa?”
   She shrugged impatiently.
   “All this contrived confusion,” she said. “Our friendship could progress
beyond this point but you never listen. You haven’t a clue about what’s
happening in Africa.”
  “I don’t like the way you keep trying to make out that I’m not an African
of Africa,” I shouted in a sudden fury.
   “Oh, for God’s sake stick on a badge—I’m AN AFRICAN OF AFRICA,” she
shouted back.
  Conversations always ended like this. And they were wildly illogical. I
was being pressed to accept some faith but I was dominated by a feeling of
acute distress. I wanted to talk to another woman about Napoleon and I
could not talk about him to Kate. Jenny was my only other woman friend
in the village. But I dare not even mention his name to her. One night he
had been roaring drunk and had walked past her hut and bawled out that
she was a Communist revolutionary and that all Communists should go to
hell and all refugees should go to hell.
   “He’s a nasty brute,” she remarked when telling me of the incident. “I m
not a Communist and could never be.”
  “He doesn’t understand a thing about politics. Besides he’s too emo¬
tional,” I said.
   “Don’t be fooled,” she said. “That emotionalism is just a cover-up. He’s
been deliberately placed to create contrived confusion.”


                                           For “Napoleon Bonaparte”     ♦   299
      “Apart from politics,” I said warily. “As a man he is an extraordinary and
dynamic personality. He’s a damn good public speaker. He is intensely
aware of people. You know, even if he dislikes you he looks you straight in
the eye. I find everybody here, except the very poor and lowly, looking over
everybody’s head and adopting false mannerisms.”
      “He is a great humanitarian,” she said gently. “I like him and always
will.”
      “You mean that?” I asked unbelievingly.
      “Yes. And I do not think he will stick around with that political party
of so-and-so’s because of his humanity.”
      “I wonder. There isn’t anything around here except so-and-so’s. And
goats and cattle. Egypt’s land, I call it. I’ve been invaded by swarms of flies,
then swarms of scorpions and when I had killed them all there were
swarms of moths the size of birds. Tell me, what is a normal relationship
between a man and a woman?”
   “I’m sorry I haven’t time for lady talk,” she said primly.


The last time we ever had a flaming row was over George Padmore and
Pan-Africanism. We were not on speaking terms for a month and it was
during that time that I found out how much I loved that puzzling, contra¬
dictory woman. Perhaps the cause of the rows was that I really would have
liked to oblige by accepting her faith—just as I had let many other people
down because I must be free mentally to take off in any direction I choose.
To choose freedom is also to choose loneliness.
   George Padmore is a prophet to me. Over and above that he was the ini¬
tiator, the liberator of Africa; he was too a kind of John the Baptist crying in
the wilderness—make ready the way. And we who come on behind keep
preparing the way with our ideas. And then, long after we are gone our Jesus
Christs and Abraham Lincolns are born who give shape, define sharply,
unmistakeably, the part we are to play in the destiny of mankind. What else
does the liberation of Africa mean to me but this inner awakening and alert¬
ness—as though from some direction I may be given a hint, a clue and eagerly
pass on this small grain of truth to some other seeker to question, examine
and add his grain. Could it not be that within the turmoil and struggle to end
poverty and oppression that writers may live too without fear of banishment
or playing footsy to some impossible, dictatorial ideology? I do not want my
mind controlled therefore I have no home on this earth. I have sealed myself
within a wall of silence. Except that which I wish, should enter.
   I have forgotten the details of my quarrel with Jenny; except that at the
time it was painful. After a month I went creeping back again.
  “Look here Jenny, I’m sorry I had a row with you. We need not ever dis¬
cuss Pan-Africanism or any other controversial matter. I really don’t know
what Pan-Africanism is except that it seems personal and not political.”
      All right. Get off the lectern,” she said. “I was wondering when this
absurd game would drag itself to an end. I must say you have a colossal


300     ♦   1960s and 1970s
vanity. You had to nurse it for a whole month. Of course, mine needs a lit¬
tle watering down from time to time.”
  “I’m really worried about my sanity, you know,” I said.
   “Oh don’t worry about that,” she said expansively. “We’re all of us quite
insane in our own ways.”
  “Really, I’m in a god-awful mess. I’ve battled against the thing the whole
time and tried to appear normal but I’m just falling to pieces. I want to tell
you something but it’s so difficult.”
  There was a wide-open mocking laughter in her eyes.
   “Go ahead,” she said. “I know who you want to talk about.”
   “How on earth did you know?” I asked, surprised, embarrassed.
   She gave me a superior smile: “It’s just that some people are born secret
agents and others, as soon as they have a secret, talk about it with their
facial muscles and eyes. You’re a give-away, chum.”
   “Have you ever seen such a beautiful-ugly man in your life before?”
   “You see him. I don’t,” she said. “I’ve got a man and another one saved
up for hard times.”
  “The only thing that bothers me,” I said, “is the terror. I’m terrified of
the man. It would seem that after a year I’ve become terror itself. They say
the nervous system can adapt itself to all states but I find that it’s an
unpleasant state and I don’t think I’m really adapted because I’m beginning
to fall to pieces.”
   “There’s quite a simple explanation for terror,” she said. “He’s just as ter¬
rified of you as you are of him. He’s afraid you’ll reject him and you’re
afraid he’ll reject you. To simplify matters further, you love him and he
loves you.”
   “Good God! I never even thought about that! You mean he loves me?
I’m not the kind of woman men love.”
   “You dearly love to think of yourself as an exceptional species,” she said
scornfully.
   “It isn’t so, really. I haven’t that kind of arrogance and it seems to need
an assertive arrogance to believe one is loved.
   “You’ll have to grab a man one day in spite of yourself. Women do that,
you know. Look, why don’t you help the man? He’s been living in hell all his
life. That man’s living in hell. The expression is one of permanent, excruci¬
ating suffering. Get up and do something. He s not Africa about which you
sit and moan all day. He’s a real man with pants!”
   I wrung my hands in agony.
   “I don’t believe the man loves me. It rather seems as though some terrible
and sinister accident has happened between us and he’s furious about it. I
know I am. I have all these overwhelming problems of refugeeism and on top
of that the most extraordinary, unfathomable phenomena has been taking
place in my life this whole year. Please, for God s sake, Jenny, believe me. I m
a strong-minded woman in the sense that I dont see ghosts and I m not sus¬
ceptible or faint or anything like that. It’s just like somebody has been living


                                        For “Napoleon Bonaparte”         ♦   301
inside me all this time. The terrible thing is that it’s involuntary—involuntary
conversations, involuntary agitation and involuntary physical reactions. You
know, I used to be somewhat of an alcoholic when I lived in South Africa but
now I’m a complete teetotaller. The sensation of retching when you have
drunk too much is the most abysmally miserable in the world. I’m often get¬
ting that feeling and being as sick as a dog. The involuntary conversations—
they happen just out of the blue. I’m always having to advise, counsel and I
talk out quite loud. I do not know the cause and only at a later time do I get
a hint from Kate that he’s involved in some mess in the village. It’s quite true
what you say about hell. I’m very familiar with it. Oh Jenny, I can’t get him
out because it is involuntary. One of these days I’ll be fired out of here
because they really cannot tolerate refugees—then what will I do?”
   “Cross that bridge when you come to it. In the meantime try to estab¬
lish some physical communication.”
      “I can’t do that. The atmosphere is too violent. Besides, Kate tells me he
says the most terrible things about refugees.”
      “There’s only two of us here. That’s meant for me. I’ve had word that
I’m going to have transport provided for a forced removal. They’ve done
everything to move me out by normal channels. Now they got to use hand¬
cuffs and chains, it seems. Anyway for a while I’m going to get me on the
diplomatic junketing roundabout and eat on the inches I’ve lost in this
abominable country.”
 “Why should one live if one is welcome nowhere on earth? Why?
Why?”
      “You wouldn’t be half as pessimistic if you got off your seat and flung
yourself     into   the   battle.   Anyway   we’re   both   southern   women.
Temperamentally, we fit in with the way things are down here. I’m getting
back here after I’ve driven the oppressors of mankind to hell and I’d advise
you to do the same. We fit in here. We belong here no matter what the so-
and-so’s have to say.”
  “Shall I ever resolve this unfathomable mystery, Jenny?”
  “I don’t know. Some men would rather cut off their tongues than tell a
woman they love her. Or it may be that he has to pass through a fire of his
own and cannot share his life with a woman. But I don’t really know.”
    I wonder where Jenny is now. She left a month before I received that
letter. I wonder if we shall ever meet again and when? And for how long
will Napoleon Bonaparte gaze with ferocious eyes into the smoke and fire
and struggle of his life? For how long shall I wait and wait and listen and
listen? And Kate? If there were inventions and machines and the hammer
and din of progress in her village she would so easily be beguiled away from
the small fanatical world of tribal secrets. For I too have my small inner
circle of strange fancy, wonder and conjectural things and they were among
the elect few I had invited in; they were a beginning of love.




302     ♦   1960s and 1970s
   Maureen Kim Sing, WHAT OF THE FUTURE?
                           South Africa 1965        English


For the Chinese, life in South Africa in the 1960s was fraught with insecurity.
Apartheid laws became ever more threatening as families faced the loss of their
shops and homes with the enforcement of the Group Areas Act. This community
of fewer than five thousand people countrywide was shrinking with the steady
emigration of its educated young professionals. Press reports frequently high¬
lighted anomalies in the treatment meted out to this minority group, which had
long straddled the dividing line between black and white.
   Within the community there was an increasing level of introspection, evident
from the appearance of many new, though short-lived, publications. These
included The Voice of SA Chinese, The Eastern Province Chinese Review, New Youth,
South Wind, Weekend Review, and the SA Chinese Student, produced in either
English or Chinese. One that flourished in the 1960s was the Student Spectrum, a
newsletter directed at the Chinese students at the University of Cape Town
(UCT). Published irregularly between two and five times a year, its twenty to
thirty pages of essays, interviews, cartoons, letters, jokes, and campus news were
sometimes controversial.
  One of its contributors was Maureen Kim Sing, daughter of a Port Elizabeth com¬
munity leader who spent decades opposing discriminatory legislation. She majored in
English literature at UCT before leaving South Africa in 1966 to study for her mas¬
ter’s degree at the University of California at Berkeley. She married a history lecturer,
Keith Haight, and became increasingly involved in anti-Vietnam, antiracist, environ¬
mental, and community movements. After moving to Ireland she and her husband
were at the forefront of the Cork branch of the Irish Anti-Apartheid Movement and
helped launch the antinuclear environmental movement that produced the Irish Green
party. She worked as a freelance journalist and with her husband (her anonymity was
often necessary to protect her family in South Africa) published anti-apartheid articles
and letters in the Irish Times and elsewhere. She has also lectured extensively on nutri¬
tion. Kim Sing has lived in France for the past fifteen years, writing, teaching, and
working as a professional translator under her own name. She is currently working
with her husband on a book on Ireland’s hidden history, and edits the monthly bilin¬
gual newsletter of her local branch of the Women’s International Club.
   Analyzing the concerns of the young Chinese in “What of the Future?” she
offers a down-to-earth examination of the attitudes prevailing within her commu¬
nity. Written in 1965 during her final year at UCT, her arguments reflect the
intensity of the debates that took place among her peers and encapsulated both the
fears and the fatalism of a minority that survived the apartheid years by living up
to the stereotype of a quiet, law-abiding community.
                                                                            Melanie Yap


                                            ♦



                                                    What of the Future?          ♦   303
What Will Happen:
Recent events, as mirrored by the local papers seem to indicate that the
Chinese will soon be placed on the “wrong” side of the colour bar. However,
the issue is not quite so clear-cut: there is the question of degree. Events
seem to favour a separate classification . . . i.e. Chinese will be classed as
Chinese, not white or non-white. Nationalist Government policy is sepa¬
rate development; so while they will not grant us white rights, neither will
they force us to integrate with any other group. There are obvious reasons
for not granting us white status; Dr. Verwoerd’s speech at Heidelburg
recently outlined the reasoning, viz:— “Grant that . . . they are not inferior
to the Japanese, but by the same token, are the Indians culturally any less
refined than the Chinese? And then are the Coloureds inferior to the
Indians.” Etc. (Quoted from Sunday Chronicle, 26th September).


What Can We Do about It?
There are three courses of action open to us. One is quite unpracticable to
our communities’ nature and circumstances, but the other two solutions
have interesting possibilities. These solutions are: resist, escape or adjust.


1) Resist:
This is the course followed by some of the English-speaking people in
South Africa. Active resistance has always been their method of survival
until quite recently. Ours was and is passive. We have got where we are by
being inconspicuous and this is still our best course of action. In any case,
to have effective resistance, leaders are needed, plus backing; whilst the
nature of the Chinese people is essentially passive—apathetic, in fact.
Furthermore, we have no bargaining powers—economical or political. So
that takes care of that solution.


2) Escape:
Emigration seems to be becoming the “done” thing. However, there are a
number of drawbacks. Firstly, not all of us are lucky enough to be able to
“get away from it all”—because of financial difficulties, business and family
ties, etc. Secondly, where can we go? The majority of the Chinese are small
businessmen. Some countries have restricted immigration—professional
people have the best opportunities. Thirdly, conditions will be different and
competition will be much tougher. Fourthly, there is no guarantee that pick¬
ings will be better elsewhere. Racial discrimination exists elsewhere too, and
while there will be no official legal colour bar, social conventions could
prove much tougher to crack. Here, we are sure of what we have and have
not: another country will be an unknown quantity. Lastly, climatic differ¬
ences may seem trivial, because we in S.A. have always taken these things
for granted: Hong Kong has its typhoons and drought, England its snow¬
bound winter, America ita annual hurricanes and floods, certain parts of
America are so humid that one cannot walk in the streets for more than 10


304 ♦   1960s and 1970s
minutes without fainting! (People go from air-conditioned houses via air-
conditioned transport to air-conditioned shops, cinemas etc.)

3) Adjust:
The majority of the Chinese will stay—because they have no other choice,
and because things will not be so bad. Now, judging in abstract, the future
seems bleak, but there are a number of consoling factors:
  The Nationalist governmental policy is separate development. The
Chinese have never been particularly keen to mix with other groups in any
case. Had apartheid not existed, pressure from within would have enforced
it in any case—possibly even more strictly than outside pressure alone
would have made it. The fear of most minority groups is of losing their
identity—apartheid will preserve ours.
   The government has promised that our livelihood will not be threatened.
However, they have their policy, which they intend to carry out so that they
cannot make exceptions. The Group Areas Act permits Chinese to retain
businesses in other areas until the death of the present owner. Theoretically
this allows time for us to seek other means of existence. However, certain
other factors are accelerating this process. Many businesses have been expro¬
priated for reasons of street-widening, civic amenity improvements, etc.
   However, this may not be a bad thing. Once upon a time, the Chinese
communities were homogenous—socially, economically, etc. However, bet¬
ter education and higher standards ofliving have led to increased diversity.
There has been an increasing amount of widening out but the process has
been very slow. The discrepancy between the homogeneity of occupation
despite increasing diversity of interests, particularly among the new gener¬
ation, has led to frustration, and unhappiness. Many of our elders complain
that the young people no longer want to “work in the shop.” There is no
reason why they should. In one way, recent events will benefit the Chinese
by forcing them into other spheres of business, the trades and professions.
   Furthermore, as mentioned above—by staying here, one is certain of what
one has. The structure of S.A. economy (Job reservations) has its advantages,
in a way. Open competition, e.g. in U.S.A. and U.K. is very fierce—which is
why S.A. is attracting so many immigrants despite her drawbacks. Here,
most Chinese have their own homes, cars, and a large measure of security.
We may not be so fortunate as to have this elsewhere, although theoretically
there may be more opportunity, in other words, second-class citizenship in
S.A. may be a lot better than first class citizenship elsewhere. Furthermore,
class distinction based on money and education is very strong overseas (in
S.A. it is superseded by racial distinction) and the majority of Chinese would
find it tough going to comply with the requirements for the standard of liv¬
ing they already enjoy in S.A.
   Socially we are in a rather ambiguous position. There are two possibili¬
ties: this state will continue, or it will be clarified. If it is clarified, it will be
to our disadvantage. For years now, there has been this disparity between


                                                  What of the Future?          *   305
legislation on the Chinese position, and the actual lack of enforcement.
This is an indication of the benevolent attitude of the government toward
the Chinese. Unfortunately, although the officials turn a blind eye to con¬
ditions, when it is pointed out to them, they are forced to apply the official
ruling. The recent tightening up on the rulings for the Chinese in sport,
entertainment and other matters, is a direct result of the barrage of the press
publicity from the English press.
  The function of an opposition newspaper is to make the government
look ridiculous whenever possible: they are not interested in us, except as
another means of showing up a weak point in the government. However,
this continual underlining of our ambiguous position can have only one
outcome: the ambiguity will be removed, and we will suffer. As far as we are
concerned, no news is good news. Any publicity is bad because it focuses
attention on us, so it is rather stupid to feel flattered because the Sunday
Times runs a full-page feature on the Chinese: “Poor Chinese—they’re such
nice people and look how horrible the government is to them.” We can do
without such sympathy, as this only serves to irritate the government.
  Possibly only when the entire machinery of apartheid is in full swing, will
they begin granting concessions again. However, at the moment they can¬
not do so at the risk of antagonising the other race groups. In the mean¬
time, it could take them anything up to 50 years to complete the process. It
is [likely] that this ambiguity could continue. As we have seen, the govern¬
ment is prepared to turn a blind eye to our “trespassing,” but continual ham¬
mering at them to clarify our position will achieve nothing ... or the wrong
result. The sport question is very important. It appears that the government
is still prepared to turn this “blind eye” to things. However, when for exam¬
ple, the W.P. [Western Province] Association asks for a decision, they will
be forced to give one. They would have done better to select Chinese play¬
ers indiscriminately—it would probably have been ignored. But the Argus
headlines about the “dilemma” has done us great harm.
  We cannot oppose the government, but neither can we actually agree
with them either—taking into consideration other groups and overseas
opinion. So where does that leave us? All we can db is what we have done
in the past: sit tight and wait. Don’t talk, and do try to suppress publicity
of any kind wherever possible.




          Ingrid Jonker, I DRIFT IN THE WIND
                       South Africa 1966     Afrikaans


Ingrid Jonker walked into the sea at Three Anchor Bay, Cape Town, on 19 July
1965. Early the next mornipg newspaper headlines proclaimed, “Beauty Queen of
Afrikaans Poetry Commits Suicide.” Nearly thirty years later, in the parliament
where once her father had denounced her politics and writing, she walked back


306   ♦   1960s and 1970s
into the limelight when Nelson Mandela quoted her poem, “The Child Who Was
Shot Dead by Soldiers at Nyanga,” in his inaugural speech on 23 May 1994.
   Born in 1933 to parents whose marriage ended when she was three, Jonker’s
upbringing was characterized by poverty. Under her grandmother’s guidance, she
started to write poems for use during church services that included coloured people
in the Cape Flats area. From the age of twelve, after both her mother and grand¬
mother had died, she lived with her father, a well-known Afrikaans writer and, later,
a National party politician. At the age of sixteen her first poems were rejected for
publication but gave her contact with poet D. J. Opperman who encouraged and
advised her. She published her first collection of poems, Ontvlugting (Escape), at the
age of twenty-two. When she submitted Rook en Oker (Smoke and Ochre), the pub¬
lishers wanted to remove two poems, including “The Child Who Was Shot Dead by
Soldiers at Nyanga.      She refused. Publication brought her the Afrikaanse Pers-
Boekhandel Prize, but cut her off from the “Afrikaner king poets,” even Opperman.
   The volume Kantelson (1966), published after her death, contains some of her
most beautiful work. “I Drift in the Wind” was written six months before her
death and probably shortly after she returned from a period in Europe. The poem
captures a crucial dilemma. If her writing is about the body and lovers, the (male)
literary world treats the poet as a “beauty queen,” as one with more sex and emo¬
tion than talent. If a female poet writes about politics, the male discomfort is audi¬
ble in the paternalistic tone of words such as naive, innocent, angry, or decadent.
   The voice in the poem feels misunderstood and deserted by friends, family, and
volk—only black Africa accompanies her lonely fingers into death. In the new trans¬
lation offered here, the word “/or” is translated not as “free” (as the standard translation
has it) but as “loose": cut off, deserted, forgotten, uprooted. The poet has no one and
nothing, no mother, father, hearth, friend—only a bitter landscape. In the second verse
she makes a distinction between her “rotted volk” and Africa. (The earlier translation
has “volk” as “nation,” but the word refers specifically to Afrikaners, who saw them¬
selves as an exclusive cultural entity with a specific destiny.) She knows that these peo¬
ple have rotted away from her, like her own father and mother. She warns them that a
hand, like the loose hand of her father against the sky, needs another hand to pray. In
the last verse she sees death covering her, her sister, her nation, and perhaps also Africa.
                                                                               Antjie Krog


                                             ♦

   (for Anna)


   Loose I have my own independence
   from graves from treacherous friends
   the hearth I have comforted glares at me
   my parents have broken themselves off from my death
   the worms stir against my mother, my father
   is clasping his hand which feathers loose against the sky
   loose I believe my old friend has forsaken me
   loose I believe you had mountains toppled in me
   loose my landscape reeks of bitter sun and blood
   What will become of me

                                                       I Drift in the Wind          ♦   307
  the cornerstones of my heart bring about nothing
  my landscape is mine hardened
  fierce embittered but open
  My volk
  follow my lonely fingers,
  people, wrap yourself in sincerity
  veiled by the sun of the future
  My black Africa
  follow my lonely fingers
   follow my absent image
   lonely as an owl
   and the fingers of the world becoming lonelier
   lonely as my sister
   My volk rotted off away from me
  what will become of this rotted volk
   a hand cannot pray alone


  The sun shall cover us
   the sun in our eyes for ever covered
  with black crows.


                                                         Translated by Antjie Krog




           Anonymous, I Am A WAILING FOOL
                             Lesotho 1967      Sesotho


This song is an example of an old woman’s genre that, like the old Sesotho mar¬
riage songs and some other forms, has been replaced by Christian hymns of
mourning at Basotho funerals. Unlike hymns, koli-ea-malla (laments) were sung
only by women upon the death of a husband or close male relative. In this song,
which is sung in the characteristically African leader-chorus “call and response”
format, the soloist immediately establishes the theme of desolation and ruin of the
household that follows the death of her husband. The chorus reinforces this theme
in their reference to rain, expanding the particular loss of the soloist to a general
statement about the loss sustained by the community when “real men,” fathers who
led and sustained families, die off, leaving behind only the shiftless and unreliable.
   Perhaps the most moving passage is the soloist’s final verse, in which she evokes
the image of herself tiptoeing to the door at sunset to see if her husband is return¬
ing, although she knows too well he will never again return. The final three lines
illustrate the Basotho performance practice that enables, even encourages, a sup¬
porting social group or individual to express the emotions felt by someone else.
H ence in this song, this la^st chorus virtually repeats lines three and four of the
soloist’s opening verse, giving the composition as a whole balance and closure.
                                                                       David Coplan


308   ♦   1960s AND 1970s
   Solo:
   I am a wailing fool who remains among ruins.
   I am a wailing fool who remains in a bare, open field.
   Where do I remain,
   By my father, with whom do I remain?


   Chorus:
   Men died; with whom do we remain?
   Men departed; only the worthless remain.
   Real men departed; with whom do we remain?


   Solo:
   I am a wailing fool who remains among ruins.
   When the sun has sunk low,
   To the door I go,
   On tip-toe advancing slowly,
   Supposing him coming alone,
   Supposing him returning from the hunt.


   Chorus:
   Men died; with whom do we remain?
   Men died; we remained in ruins.
   Men died; we remained in a bare, open field.


                              Transcribed by David Copland and Seakhi Santho
                                                      Translated by David Coplan




       Fatima Meer, MURMURS IN THE KUTUM
                           South Africa 1969      English


Fatima Meer, a sociologist and writer born in 1929, has been an important politi¬
cal activist in South Africa. Her writings cover a variety of genres—biography,
local history, essays, travelogue, short stories, speeches, polemics, and letters.
Meer’s father worked for The Indian Opinion, a newspaper founded by Mohandas
Gandhi in 1904. Influenced by Gandhi, Meer’s involvement in political activity
began with the Passive Resistance Campaign of 1946. She was banned from 1954
to 1956, and in 1976, in the wake of the Soweto uprising, she spent a little more
than four months in detention with women such as Winnie Mandela. She was not
brought to trial.
   To counter the disabling effects of apartheid on potential black writers, Meer set
up the Madiba Press in 1989. Through it and the Institute of Black Research at the
University of Natal, she has been instrumental in getting many works published.

                                               Murmurs in the Kutum          ♦   309
She has written two biographies about key South African political figures,
Apprenticeship of the Mahatma and Higher than Hope: The Official Biography of Nelson
Mandela.
  The Portrait of Indian South Africans, from which “Murmurs in the Kutum is
taken, is one of her earliest works. While she resists the racist, ghettoizing politics
of the apartheid regime, she undertakes to restore knowledge and appreciation of
one of the many racial and cultural groups in South Africa. In this cameo, Meer
uses a fictional mode to present the Indian kutum, or extended family, and the pre¬
carious ethnicities of mid—twentieth century South Africa. The Indian shop is at
once the place of border crossings and transactions that expose racial othering. In
the gendered spaces of the kutum, women’s opportunities are limited compared to
those of the men in their families.
                                                           Devarakshanam Govinden


                                          ♦

Hlatikulu, the Great Forest, is an African Reserve. The landscape is bush
and scattered trees and rounded huts that look like some browning vegeta¬
tion sprouting from the earth. Near the mountain, it is really a hill, there is
a store which belonged to Amod who died five years ago, and before Amod,
to Amod’s father Ebrahim, and before Ebrahim to Dawood. Now Amod’s
widow and his eldest son Unus run the shop. There are other children—
Yakub in London studying to be a lawyer and Suliman in Dublin who will
be a doctor, and there is Farida who helps her mother with household
chores and in the evenings, keeps a firm eye on neatly tabulated notes from
the Correspondence College. She learns History and Geography, English
and Afrikaans and Botany in preparation for the Matriculation exam.
   In the shop, large curling sacks of beans and mealies, hlubus and flour
lean against the wooden counter; brightly coloured scarves, square cotton
dresses and men’s checked shirts hang from the ceiling. Tins of food and
rolls of material line the shelves; bunches of billy cans dangle from king-
size nails and an old gramophone beats out a rhythm to which picannins
dance. The customers come when there is money—women big-bosomed
and big-bottomed with wired ankles and beaded^ necks, and sometimes
men with rippling muscles and shiny flesh.
   Next to the shop is a verandah, cool with fern and cacti, and behind it,
dwelling rooms. Except for the verandah and the sitting room which leads
off from it and the new bathroom and toilet with a flushing system, this
has been the home of the family ever since the days of Dawood.
   To this homestead, there comes on a sultry December noon, a happy
contingent of three cars; one from Durban, one from Pietermaritzburg and
the third from Dundee. An excited concert of hooters herald their arrival.
The various members of the Amod family hurriedly leave what they are
doing, and quickly assemble on the verandah to welcome the relatives who
have travelled such distances to emphasize the warmth of their blood
bonds. Some of these bonds are remote. There are present in the party, not


310   ♦   1960s and 1970s
only a brother and his family, but also the brothers-in-law and cousins
whose great grandfathers had been first cousins to the original Dawood,
and their families.
   Voices pour out of the cars: important authoritarian voices, diffident
subordinate voices, restrained, educated voices. Absent are the voices of
children for these have become suddenly withdrawn and silent. The own¬
ers of the voices shake themselves out like so many fowls, the old women
in wide smocks and wide trousers, the young girls in tight shifts and tight
trousers, little boys in stylish (just like Dad’s) suits, the little girls in fancy
stretched out skirts.
   Voices and bodies pour exuberantly into the doorway and there is much
laughing and greeting and slapping of backs and sharing of giggles. The
children, awed by the sudden revelry of the grown-ups, cling tightly to
their mothers and look around in wide-eyed wonder until they are noticed
and admired by the hosts and playfully chastised by their mothers for being
unsociable and not playing with each other.
   “Is that your little Iqbal?" one cousin kindly asks of another. “My, how he has
grown. How like his father,” and she sinks into sighs of how quickly time flies,
how old they are getting, how they will soon be mothers-in-law (they are
barely twenty-five); and little Iqbal shrinks in size and nibbles the elaborately
embroidered end of his mother’s head drape, awdnie, only to be scolded for
doing so: then he plunges all the deeper into her skirt. “Your Shamima is
grown up now, ” an ageing sixth cousin with three sons to be married, notes
meaningly as she eyes a helplessly blushing dark-eyed, dark-haired girl who
has newly entered her teens. Her mother retorts sharply, protectively, “She is
still at school, ” and walks away to complain to another relative of Budie Bai’s
strange notions. “Some people cast their evil looks even on children, Chi."
   Soon the group separates. The men crowd into the little sitting room,
the married women into Mrs Amod’s room, the young unmarried girls into
another bedroom; the children, at first reticent, are soon raucously running
through the passage and into the garden, followed by helpless female pleas
to be careful of the dangers. The fifth group, of growing men, hang around
the window where the young girls are gathered, hopeful of a little prank, a
tiny flirtation, but quite without courage to stimulate any. So they hang
around, and after a while forget what they are hanging around for, and
become mercifully absorbed in each other and drift away into the yard.
  The two Amod women and Annie, their domestic help, grow boisterous
with work, but helpless in the confusion of hilarious voices demanding
their attention. There is a tussle—a resistance. The Amod women snatch
away plates and kitchen cloths and remonstrate in feigned horror. “Oh, no,
no. We cant allow you to work. You hardly ever visit us. Sit and relax and talk. ”
The visitors complain about being treated like visitors; and not like people
of the house. “We are one, ” they affirm. “How can we come again if you make
divisions like that. ” Helpless against such rebuke, the Amod women sur¬
render with the dignity of martyrs: knives are picked up, radishes and


                                              Murmurs in the Kutum            ♦   311
onions cut, papads fried, pickles and plates taken to the table and finally
the men are called in to lunch.
   11Finish up the children too," a visiting mother suggests. “Put them on the
floor. Haven’t you some chatais (grass mats) and some newspaper?” “Are, are”
Mrs. Amod protests, “How can you put them on the floor. We’ll put them on
the table when the men are finished." “They’re just children’’ is the carefree
reply. “When will we finish if everybody eats on the table?"
   “Ah, yes, that's true," Mrs Amod agrees as if it is some sagacious revela¬
tion, “and the children must be hungry after the journey, ” and with feigned
reluctance, but obvious relief, accepts the suggestion.
   Grass mats are spread out on the verandah. Newspapers are laid in the
middle, the children are seated on either side, and the food brought in amid
the excited chatter of juvenile voices. First vermicelli, fried brown in sugar
and butter and flavoured with cinnamon and cardemon, then rice, generous
bowls of chicken curry; papads, bubbly and golden brown, heaped high on
plates, and salads and pickles made of mangoes, lemons and vegetables.
   The men are served in the dining room. Three tables are joined to make
one. Unus offers them soap and towels, and pours the warm water over
their hands, from an imposing looking silver urn. They eat happily, hun¬
grily, chaffing those whose helpings are thought to be too large, warning
others whose manners are considered too good.
   The table is cleared, table-cloths dusted, the table relaid; the women sit
down to eat. The meal over, appetites quietened and bellies heavy, the var¬
ious groups withdraw to their chosen quarters to relax with the ease and
the informal familiarity of persons who know each other intimately.
   Male conversation soon plunges into a discussion of affairs of business.
The lawyer is much in demand and protests that he is not in his office and
that he has made it a rule not to discuss legal business on holiday. Unus is
particularly disturbed by an ejection order from the Community Develop¬
ment Board. Everybody agrees that it is evil, pernicious, inhuman. They do
not have strong enough words to describe it. “After 70 years of business!
Seventy years of blood and sweat! Evil, evil. ’’They shake their heads. “It is a
sign of kayamuth” (end of the world) an ageing uncle prophesises with the
special kind of authority which comes to people given to much telling of
beads. “They will suffer, the Nasaras (Christians). They will burn in the fire
of hell. ” “The pigs of lecherous brothers-in-law, ” a younger uncle contributes
hotly. The politically conscious member of the family remarks, “You can
refuse to submit. You can refuse to move out. ” And then what?" another chal-


   “Go to gaol—satyagraha, passive resistance," the Congressite continues,
with increasing excitement. “Gandhi did it. Nehru did it. Dadoo and Naicker
did it. Who are we to think the gaols too good for us? Nana Sita is doing it.
That’s it—gaol!”
   “Not easy, ” the same voice stubbornly persists. “What do you get out of gaol?"
   “It is not what you get. It’s what remains. Your dignity, your integrity as a


312   ♦   1960s and 1970s
people.   He waxes eloquently. The others are abashed and listen with respect.
 Do you know what Helen Suzman said to some conservatives who sought her
advice? Give me a hundred Nana Sitas! One hundred Nana Sitas and there will
be no Group Areas Act! We have only one Nana Sita, ” he sighs dejectedly.
   The women have arranged themselves on the large four poster and the
three single beds in Mrs Amod’s bedroom. Some sit cross-legged, some
recline and the younger sit on the edges. Budie Khala (big aunty) has
spread out the various components of her paan dabba (betel leaf box) on
her generous lap and is preparing paans to meet the voluminous demand.
A child watches with fixed interest. Leisurely, Budie Khala stretches out a
firm green leaf on silk clad knee, smears it white, with lime, sprinkles it,
ochre with katho, scatters it finely with betelnut, garnishes it with carde-
mon and caraway seeds; then, expertly folds it into a triangular packet,
nails it in place with a clove and ostentatiously directs the watching child
to give it to his Gorie Ma-mie (fair aunty). One favour bequeathed, she
goes on to serve the next and the careful ritual begins again and all the
while she draws attention to herself and complains that she is valued for
her paan alone and nobody cares for her for reasons other than that.
   A four year old approaches her with outstretched chubby palm and a
mumble “For me too." Aw haw,” Budie Khala laughs with pleasure. “So you
also want paan, he? Tell your father to open me a paan shop.” And that pro¬
vides a cue for a new diversion on the topic of paan and paan shops and
the money to be made from such a venture. The popularity of Budie
Khala’s paan is finally confirmed beyond doubt, when Mohamed, the new
Dublin returned Doctor, pushes his head through the doorway and joins
the queue. A very special paan is made for him and Budie Khala chaffs, “I
thought that doctors were against paan—cancer, he cancer? Cancer my Anus! I
never heard of cancer, until I came to South Africa—the old people never had
cancer and they all eat paan!”
   Ask him now, ask him now, ” a frail little creature urges the plump old
thing stretched out on the bed, with naked white feet and naked white
ankles peeping out of her trouser. “Yes, yes,” she responds urgently, and
heavily draws herself up. “Ha Bhai, I have been troubled with this rash for
months now,” and her voice fills with the memory of pain, and tears gather
in her eyes. “Nothing seems to help. Bhai you see, and tell me what the trouble
is. Tell me of some medicine I can use. ” The young man’s smile is patronising.
He expects such consultations and has already learnt that they do not pay
him special tribute. He is a minor accident in the string of general practi¬
tioners and specialists already consulted. “Itchy? hu?”ht asks expertly. “What
are you using?” “The last doctor gave me some pills and some lotion. ” She lifts
her dress and extracts a phial and a tube from the pocket of her petticoat.
“But they don’t help, ” she whines. Mohamed examines these elaborately. And
what did he say?” he asks. “When do they say anything, these doctors? It is only
a doctor of your own house who will examine and explain carefully. The others
just look and give. ” Mohamed is almost flattered, almost tempted, but he


                                            Murmurs in the Kutum         ♦   313
withholds himself in time. “ This medicine is good. Keep on with it, and if the
itching doesn't disappear, I'll send you a lotion I have at the hospital.
   Somebody quips that it is time he married. His return quip is not very
funny, but everybody laughs. He leaves the women, his mouth, a bulge, his
saliva, red. His mother usually quiet, now feels called upon to say something.
She sighs: “ You know the children of today. You can take a horse to the river—
you cantforce it to drink. ” She relaxes happily as all nod in vigorous agreement.
   Somebody comes up with a consolation. “Well at least he didn't yoke a White
female and bring her along." “That is God’s mercy, ” his mother sighs once again.
 “You should have been in Bhanjee Bais’ house that day,’’ the new contributor
continues, “ When they received news that her son in Dublin had married a White
girl. It was like a funeral,” and urged by the rest who don’t know the details,
she recounts with feelings of propriety how Bhanjee Bai had fainted with
justifiable provocation and how with equally justifiable provocation, cursed
her son and his children to be—and, with even greater provocation, had
decreed that they were dead in her eyes. They click their tongues in sympa¬
thy with Bhanjee Bai, and wag them in malice against the son and the pros¬
titute of a White woman who has misled him. “She must have bewitched him, ”
offers one. “Ba—it is too risky to send children out to study, ” says another.
   The children discover the well. Somebody removes the lid. Little bodies
crowd round and lean over, mesmerized by the threatening emptiness which
separates the water that appears to continue for miles. They throw out their
voices, first one, then two, then three, then a chorus, and thrill as the voices
come back to them—one, two, three, then a chorus. They take stones and
drop them in, one by one, and wait in great awe for the sounds as they strike
the water, and are relieved when they do. And all the while, each child feels
himself falling down, down, down to the bottom of the well. “Hey, you stu¬
pid rascals. Do you want to die?” a shrill adult voice shatters their taut nerves.
A child screams, another is plunged into tears. The spell is broken.
   The young unmarried girls giggle and talk. Those engaged to be mar¬
ried are shy with importance. Others tease. They talk about clothes and
films and marriage and about bad girls who talk to boys, and some that
even have dates. “Dates?” they exclaim in horror.' They then talk about
schools, and studies, and ambitions.
   And so the afternoon is spent, and the sky grows red with the setting of
the sun and the evening is on them. The time has come for leave taking.
Who knows when next they will meet, and of those gathered, how many.
   Aw-Jaws (come agains) are exchanged. “It is so nice here, ” the visitors
compliment. “It is jungle here, ” the hosts reply with suitable modesty. “Next
time don’t pay us such a niggardly visit." “And you, when will you be coming?”
Promises are forced. Promises are made. Children are enticed to stay, chil¬
dren are scolded and secretly pinched, for taking such enticements seriously.
   The doors are closed. Hands wave. The headlights burst open the dusty
road. The parties leave, dnd the Amods close the door of their homestead,
light the hurricane lamp, and suddenly feel empty, alone and exhausted.


314   ♦   1960s AND 1970s
                          !Unn/obe Morethl^iva,
  Tobacco, Sugar, Alcohol, and Coffee:
     These Things Have Turned Us
              into Slaves
                            Botswana 1971       Ju/’hoansi


This account comes from a woman named !Unn/obe Morethlwa, who spoke on
tape to me in 1971 in Kauri, Botswana, in that country’s Northwest district. She
had lived much of her earlier life in Ghanzi district to the south, first as part of a
traditional hunting and gathering band, and later as a serf doing barely recom¬
pensed labor for Afrikaner farmers. From her perspective at outdoor kitchens and
laundry lines behind the settlers’ houses, she described these early ranchers and
how they settled Ghanzi. She had lived for a while on a mission station as well, but
rejected the religious teaching in favor of her own healing religion.
   In 1971 !Unn/obe was living in a grass hut in the bush again, in the sixth decade of
her life. She sustained herself as part of a socially traditional community by gathering
wild foods and selling ostrich-eggshell beadwork to occasional tourists, who in those
years and in that place numbered few more than two or three per year. Her people’s
isolation and hunting and gathering heritage were at that time increasingly under
pressure, not only from white ranchers, but also from black Tswana and Herero pas-
toralists who wished to expand their cattle herds into the former San foraging areas.
   !Unn/obe’s perspective on changing times was informed by a great deal of expe¬
rience on the boundaries between her own and the incoming societies, both black
and white. She had all the ingredients for trenchant political analysis. She explained
without rancor but with great clarity the process by which contact with the Ghanzi
settlers gradually circumscribed her people’s freedom. She said that what had
“ruined” them were four things brought into her remote area by outsiders: tobacco,
sugar, alcohol, and coffee. “These things have turned us into slaves,” she said.
                                                                       Megan Biesele


                                           ♦


When the white people had filled up Ghanzi, we then saw for the first
time the things which came with them. We saw for the first time engines
to draw up the water, and all the things that we had never seen until the
white people came. The white people certainly have a lot of things!
   But when the first whites came, they had to pound up and eat what the
black people ate. They used digging sticks like ours at the beginning. They
collected food and ate it. In fact, I came to know zan roots [used to sour milk
distinctively for churning butter] through the Boers. They spoke, and we dug
zan roots for them and pounded them and laid them out to dry. Then we’d
churn and churn and churn with them, receiving only black coffee to drink



                             Tobacco, Sugar, Alcohol, and Coffee                ♦   315
for doing this. Then we’d churn and churn some more, and the butter would
come, and they’d put it in bowls, put it in bowls, put it in bowls, and then
they’d sit and drink the buttermilk and distribute some to us also.
  Another portion of the milk they would refuse that we churn, because
they wanted us to put it into their coffee for them to drink. When the
empty tins were full, the Boers were finished with this work. The milk spent
the night here, and the butter spent the night there. The water engine
would stop and make a sound like “ko-ko-ko” but the cattle still drank. We
Ju/’hoansi drew and drew and drew water by hand. We cranked and cranked
until the trough was full and the cattle could come and drink. If there was
no engine—uh-uh! A Bushman would do the work! Bushman worked hard!
We, the red Bushmen, are the ones who did the work at that place, Ghanzi.
  Women did the work of drawing the water. Women took care of the cat¬
tle. Women took care of the calves. Women took care of the sheep. Women
took care for the horses. Women took care of the donkeys.
  The men worked cutting the trees for poles and lumber and all kinds of
wood uses. Men did this, and they milked the cows. The women were slower
about getting up in the mornings, because they had no warm clothes. The
Boers for whom we worked at that time are no longer in Ghanzi, as we sit
here now. Then the word came to us, the word of Seretse [Seretse Khama,
first president of Botswana]. The word was Ipelegeng [self-reliance], Seretse
said to the Boers, “White people, treat your employees nicely and with
respect.” When that word came down, they ran off. They are no longer over
there in Ghanzi. There are only different Boers there now.


                                     Transcribed and translated by Megan Biesele




                  Nongenile Masithathu Zenani                      ,
      A Man Hides Food from His Family
                          South Africa 1972       isiXhos^


Nongenile Masithathu Zenani has achieved a considerable reputation as a prolific
and consummate performer of iintsomi (intsomi is the Xhosa word for oral narrative;
the plural is iintsomi), in which she interweaves and expands on the core stories
handed down through oral tradition. Including in her repertoire the genealogical and
epic accounts generally believed to have been typically performed by men (one of her
performances has extended over seventeen days), she transgresses the conventional
associations between gender and genre.
   In this intsomi, performed and recorded in 1972 at her home in Nkanga in the
Gatyana district of the Transkei, three story strands are drawn together. The tale
focuses on the transition of a wife from her house of birth to her house of marriage,
and on her establishment as a force for normalcy in her new homestead. When she dis¬
cussed the story, Zenani argued that the husband is damaged by his irresponsibility. He


316   ♦   1960s AND 1970s
becomes powerless in the same way that his family does. In the logic of the narrative,
the husband is the drought; the wife is the instrument for change. Through offerings
of food, the wife will move the husband toward plenty, toward normalcy. She takes over
his functions.
   With the help of her biological family, she establishes its influence in her hus¬
band s homestead. The food is, in this respect, an extension of the in-laws, a chain
connecting the wife to her house of birth. The husband is seen as an adversary, a
negative force to be brought into the framework of the house of birth. The move
to the house of marriage is a move into a drought-stricken area where she and her
children are at the mercy of her husband. Only when the presence of the house of
birth is felt in the house of marriage is harmony achieved. The ties with the wife’s
house of birth are purposely broken by the husband: The food chain connecting
the two houses is severed when he moves the food into the cave, sending the in¬
laws’ representatives back to their homes. The kinship system will not allow this
deception to prevail. The food represents the channel with the in-laws, and this
channel must be kept open, or drought will destroy everything. The force of the
wife must be formally and firmly established in the homestead of the husband.
   The second and third parts of the story underscore these themes metaphori¬
cally, with fantasy characters coming to represent symbolically the husband’s
actions in the real world. They become poetic commentaries on the destructive
activities of the husband who, in his selfishness and greed, breaks the marriage
bond. This is a narrative of transition, a drama of conflicting powers; the final
argument centers not so much on drought and plenty, or even responsibility and
irresponsibility, though these are obviously involved. Rather, the narrative focuses
primarily on the establishment of the presence of the in-laws in the house of mar¬
riage, for the protection of the woman and the children, and for the protection of
the in-laws themselves. In the process, the role of the wife is emphasized.
   Zenani was born in 1906. Her autobiography, recorded on 3 August 1976, may
be found under the title “And So I Grew Up,” in Patricia W. Romero, ed., Life
Histories of African Women (1988).
                                                                       Harold Scheub


                                          ♦

There were a woman and a man. It happened that this woman gave birth;
she bore some children, including a boy. The children were of various ages,
the boy a little older than the others.
   Time passed then. Time passed at this home of theirs.
   After some time had lapsed, the people ate the crops that they had cul¬
tivated. They harvested the crops. Then winter came—and these activities
were all repeated.
  During all these times, that woman lived happily with her husband.
  Time passed, years followed years, and eventually there came a season of
drought. Everything was parched. The trees lost their leaves; rivers dried
up. And as the rivers dried up, it became obvious that there was nothing to
eat. People resorted to eating old food: pit corn was dug out of the corn
pits; sour food was now being eaten. Some of the pit corn had maggots
in it, it was so old. And the people were not fond of it. They would some-

                                A Man Hides Food from His Family              ♦   317
times develop stomachaches, caused by the corn that was three or four
years old—it had finally rotted in the pits. Yo! What will be done with this
corn?
   The man of this homestead had some livestock—some milk cows, a few
milk goats. There were corresponding calabashes for the stock, a separate
calabash for the goat milk, called “the calabash for children.” And the cal¬
abash for cows’ milk was called “the calabash for the older people,” the
mother and father. Milk would be poured on the pit corn. Or the pit corn,
having been ground up, would be cooked, then milk would be added. On
another day, to give their stomachs a break from the pit corn that was so
old and rotten, they would shift to milk.
   Time passed in that way, and the family continued to eat these rotten
mealies. Time passed, time passed, and this man regularly went out to herd
his livestock. But whenever he saw some people, he would go to them,
leaving the cattle behind. He would go to them, greet them, and they
would converse, discussing the drought.
  “This is awful for us, too.”
  “We’ve stopped eating those bitter mealies.”
  “The food has rotted. It’s developed maggots.”
  “Now we’re eating roots.”
  The man asked, “What are these roots?”
  They told him about the root: “Well, it’s something that’s dug up in the
pasture.”
  “Then it’s roasted and put into the hearth. But you can eat it when it’s
raw too.”
   “But it really should be roasted, so that it settles well in the stomach. A
fire should be kindled, and it should be roasted to remove the rawness.”
  “When it’s cooked, its quality as a plant comes to an end.”
   The man asked them to point out the roots to him, because over there
at his home starvation was imminent. All they had was milk. Milk was the
only thing they had in their stomachs. It was as if one drank milk and
nothing else: “No matter what one pours the milk over, it’s as if one has
eaten only milk. He tastes nothing else.”       A
  When the conversation was at an end, the people helped the man to find
some roots.
  One of them said, “There’s one!”
  They showed him where it was, so that he might dig it up himself.
  One of them said, “Dig it up.”
   Then they told him to taste it, to see what it was like, so that he would
be able to identify it.
  All day he dug these roots, and at last he was able to identify them prop¬
erly. And he began to dig for other roots. He put them into a bag. He had
a goatskin bag that he had tanned and provided with some pockets. In the
pockets of the goatskin bag were places for putting things, one could force
them into the pockets. That is what he did.


318   ♦   1960s and 1970s
  At length, these roots were a bundle, and he put them down. Then,
when it was time to go home, he turned the cattle around. He went home,
and, when he got there, he put the cattle into the kraal.
  His child, this boy, said, “Mama! Mama, look! What’s Father carrying?”
  His mother said, “What is he carrying, my child?”
  “He’s carrying something. But I don’t know what it is. He’s carrying
something on his shoulder. Maybe he’s bringing some corn.”
  His mother said, “Mhm! I wonder where he got them from, my child?”
  They sat in hope, constantly looking out at him. He put the cattle into
the kraal, and, when he emerged from the kraal, he went into the house.
  He dropped the load.
  “Nobani, kindle the fire.”
  “Mhm?”
  “Please kindle the fire so that the children can have something to eat.
H ow have things gone today?”
  His wife said, “We’ve been hungry all day. Even my breasts are dry.
Nothing comes out of them because Pm so hungry.”
  “Kindle, kindle the fire, Wife. You’ll be satisfied today.”
  The wife got up and got some firewood, and she built the fire. Then the
man uncovered his load, he poured the contents out on the ground. He
divided these things, he divided them, saying, “These on this side are
yours. They’re for you and the children,” and he snuggled the roots into the
hearth. He showed his wife and son how they were to be roasted. They
continued to push the roots into the hearth. When they had been properly
put into the hearth, the roots would whistle. Then they would burst. The
members of the family would take them out, allow them to cool, then they
would eat them.
  This went on, day after day. Soon, the threat of starvation had been alle¬
viated. When they drank milk, they drank it when it had been poured over
these roots.
  Whenever this man left home, he would dig for these roots. Whenever
he herded cattle, he would dig for roots. Every day, he dug up these roots.
   So it went. A month came to an end; a second month appeared. The
family was beginning to feel that “Really, these roots aren’t corn.”
  “This is a plant.”
  The root began to be felt in the stomach. It began to show evidence that
“I am not really corn. Even though I’m eaten, I’m just a plant.” And that
plant became tiresome. But there was nothing that could be done about it
because it did remove the feeling of giddiness that the hunger caused.
  The wife said, “Sobani, please go to the home of my birth.” She said,
“There’s never been this kind of starvation at my home. Many crops are
cultivated there—corn and pumpkins, beans are grown there, millet is
grown. And because so many things are cultivated, it’s unlikely that there’s
nothing left over there. I’m a nursing mother, so I cannot go. Please go for
me, my husband. Go to my home.”


                               A Man Hides Food from His Family        ♦   319
  The husband said, “But Nobani, with whom will I leave the cattle?”
  His wife said, “I’ll just put my child on my back. I’ll find time to go and
herd while you’re gone. I can’t herd the cattle for the entire day, but I’ll do
it part of the time. This boy and I will help each other. Now please go! I
have a little baby here. I can’t go. We’ll all die because of this hunger.”
  The man journeyed then. He got up the following morning and did
what his wife had asked. He went to his in-laws’ place. He traveled; he
walked and arrived at his in-laws’ place. When he got there, he knocked at
the door and greeted them.
  They responded, asking where he had come from.
  He said that he had come from his home, that he had been sent here “by
my wife. She said, Father-in-law, that I should come here to her home. My
wife has given birth to a child, and the starvation is about to kill her—it’s
especially difficult for her because she has just given birth. Her child is also
in danger of starving. In that entire land of ours, no one visits anyone else
anymore. All we do is eat roots that are dug up on the veld. They’re put
into the hearth and roasted. We’ve been eating roots for two months now.
And we’ve come to realize that this root is only a plant; it’s not corn.”
  The mother-in-law and her companions were concerned. “Yo! How
could she give birth while she was starving? Well, you 11 return to your
home in the morning.”
   His sisters-in-law were there, and there were some young men there too,
and boys; his father-in-law was there and his mother-in-law.
  “You can go back tomorrow. The young women will accompany you.”
   Before the husband went to sleep, a beast was slaughtered for him there
at his in-laws’ place. He gorged himself. He kept one side of the beast,
from the foreleg to the hindleg. He kept that. He would take it home with
him. He would take it to his own homestead.
  At dawn the next day, the man was ready to go home. Various things
were prepared for his journey: he was given corn, beans, and millet, all in
equal quantities. And there was also the whole side of meat.
  When everything was ready, when the food had been prepared, the hus¬
band said, “Mother,” speaking to his mother-in-law, the mother of his wife.
   His mother-in-law responded.
   He said, “We’re also lacking a pot over there at my home. The one we
used to have is broken. My wife asked if you would lend her one. And,
because of the problem of starvation, there isn’t even any salt. We use salt
on nothing now. Please give her some salt, too.”
  All this was done for the husband. He was given some salt; he was given
a large quantity of salt that would last a long time. And he was given a
small pot. These things were tied into three bundles so that he would be
able to carry them more easily.
   He was accompanied by the young women. They helped him to carry
his load. They were told to accompany him right to his home.
   He traveled with those young women, walking to his home. There was


320   ♦   1960s and 1970s
a river that had to be crossed. When they got to the river, the husband said,
“Well, my in-laws . .
  The young women answered, “Brother-in-law?”
   Please stop here, my in-laws. Stop. Really, it’s all right now. just turn
around and return to your home. I’m fairly close to my own home now. You
don’t have to accompany me further. Just take these loads to the other side
of the river and deposit them over there. Then you can turn back. I saw the
amount of work that has to be done over there at your own house, work
that you re needed for. Now I’ve left the land of my in-laws. The country
on the other side of the river is mine. I’ll tie the bundles together and carry
all three of them myself. I won’t be laughed at for carrying such a big load,
not on that side of the river—because, really, I was born in that country.
Turn around, my in-laws.”
  These young women said, “How can you go home carrying such a big
load? What will our sister say? She’ll wonder why we left you, why we didn’t
help you to carry such a burden.”
  The man said, “No, my in-laws, really, I cannot accept further help. I
have already been assisted greatly by you. And because of that, no one can
say anything negative about my in-laws. Turn around, go back.”
  The young women turned around then, and he remained there. When
the women had disappeared in the distance, this fellow took the three bun¬
dles, one at a time. He began by taking the corn. He ran with the bundle.
He hurried with the corn and went into a forest—there was a forest not far
from his homestead. He got to the forest; there was a little cliff there. He
looked around for a cave. He found one, then put the load down in it.
When he had put the load of corn into the cave, he returned; he went to
pick up the load of beans. Again he ran, and he put the beans into the cave
also. Then he returned once more. The load of meat and the load of millet
were still there at the side of the river. He ran and put these into the cave
as well.
  When he had satisfied himself that all was well, he thought, “I’ll just go
back and pick up the pot and the salt.”
   He returned to the river. Then he ran and put those things in the cave.
  When he got back to the cave, he began his first task. He took the mil¬
let, then looked for a stone. He ground the millet thoroughly. He ground
it, he ground it. Then he moistened it with water and molded it into little
loaves—the loaves were the same size as roots, the roots that are dug up in
the pasture. He took eight of these loaves, and put them into the fire. Then
he cut the meat and roasted it in the fire. He roasted it, he roasted it, and
he ate quite a lot of it—until he was sated. Then he took the little pot. He
went to the river and dipped water. He returned. He drank this water.
When he was finished, he departed.
  The sun was setting now. There he is, going toward his home—and he
was not carrying even one of those things that he had been given by his in¬
laws. He had left all that food behind in the cave.


                              A Man Hides Food from His Family          ♦   321
  When he was fairly close to his home, he looked about for roots. He dug
them up. He dug, he dug these roots. Then he took them to his home, and
he threw them down near his wife.
  He said, “Yo! You made such a fool of me! Sending me so far! And for
nothing. They’re really starving over there. Yo, they’re starving. They re
really starving! They have nothing to eat at all. They eat roots. There’s
nothing, nothing at your home! You sent me there for nothing. I looked
like a fool! So I just went about, scavenging along the road.” So saying, he
threw the roots down, then brought the cattle into the kraal.
  His wife said, “Didn’t you even get some millet at my home?”
  He said, “No.”
  “Weren’t there even some grains of corn?”
  “No, there was nothing.”
  “Not even a few beans?”
  “No.”
  “Didn’t you even get a pot at my home?”
  “No.”
  “This is a sad affair.” The wife sat down. “My hopes have been foiled. I
did not think that you would return home with nothing. I hoped there
would be some relief.”
  Time passed. She kindled a fire. These roots sizzled. They were snug¬
gled into the hearth and roasted.
  As for the husband, he put his “roots” [millet loaves] on his own side of
the hearth. But his wife caught their scent.
  “What kind of roots are those? They have a peculiar smell. And why
don’t your roots whistle? What’s the matter with them, Sobani?”
  Her husband was evasive. “Well, really, your roots are of the variety that
belongs to women. Mine are the kind that belongs to men. The two kinds
are not the same. Yours—well, you know that you tend to char them badly.
That’s the reason for the difference. You women overheat them. They get
burned on the outside and aren’t cooked on the inside. We men put ours
under the ashes.”
  His wife was quiet. This fellow ate his roots, eight of them.
  Again, his wife said, “Ee, Sobani! Why is it that your roots don’t crunch
when you chew them? Yours are quiet; ours crunch!”
   “What’s the matter with this woman? I tell you, you must remember
that you women overheat the roots, then take them off the fire while
they’re still raw. Mine get well-cooked. I put them in the hearth, then pile
on the coals so that the roots become nice and soft.”
   His wife was quiet.
  The next morning, the fellow took his cattle out to the veld, leaving his
family behind, hungry. They had to resort to drinking milk. This fellow
went off, and when he was a distance away, the wife said to the boy, “My
child!”                     >
  The child: “Hmm?”


322   ♦   1960s and 1970s
  “Have you noticed that your father hasn’t roasted as many roots for him¬
self since his return from my home? Since the day he got back, there’s been
a change in the amount of roasting that he does. He just roasts two roots.
What does he eat? Sometimes he doesn’t even drink milk. And milk is
plentiful at home now. What is your father eating?”
  The child said, “I don’t know.”
  She said, “Your father is eating something. Now you stay here for a
while with the baby.” So she said to the boy, who took the child and
remained there at home with it.
  The woman traveled. She walked and walked, keeping to the shadows.
She went over there to the mountains, far in the distance. She looked care¬
fully, going to the places where the man usually herded the cattle.
  Then she saw him—and she noted that he was looking around. He was
looking around furtively. He ran then and disappeared in a cave.
  The woman came away from the mountains, then went back another
way. She arrived, and when she got there she saw smoke coming from
inside the cave. She stood at the outside and heard someone saying, “Be on
the lookout, my penis cover! Is anyone coming? Is anyone coming?” Then
she heard the sounds of grinding. And she knew that he was grinding.
  The woman looked around for a rock, a big round rock that would stay
in a track, that would be certain to hit him, to smash him over there. She
aimed the rock—the woman knew that meat was being roasted inside the
cave, she could tell by the smell. So she rolled the rock, she kept it straight
in its course. She rolled it, and the stone flew over there to the place where
the man was roasting the meat.
   Suddenly the man heard something in front of him—nqhoooooooo! He was
startled. He ran, leaving his clothes behind. He fled—naked! And whenever
he looked back—Yo! This rock! Here was this rock, “coming straight at me!”
He ran; he ran and ran. He looked back each time he crossed a river, and—
“Yo! This rock! Here’s this rock, coming straight at me!” The man ran, and
the sun went down, and he was still being pursued by the rock.
  In the meantime, this woman went into the cave, and when she got there:
“Oh, here’s meat! And here is corn! And beans! Millet! And here’s the pot!”
  The woman took these things. She made several trips. She traveled with
those foods, a bundle at a time—walking with them, going to her home
with them. She arrived, put the bundle down, then went back to get
another. And she put that one down, then went back to get yet another.
And she put that one down too.
  She sat. And when she saw that the sun was going to set, the woman
took some corn and cooked it. When it was cooked, she took it off the fire.
She ground it, then poured milk over it for her children.
  And they ate.
  Then she put the pot over there, in the house. The woman did not hide
these things—she carefully put them in the upper part of the house, in full
view, so that her husband would see them when he came in.


                              A Man Hides Food from His Family          ♦   323
  The woman cut the meat into pieces, put the pieces into a pot, and
cooked them. The meat was cooked.
  And they ate it.
  She and her children finished the meat, and she took the bones and put
them in the upper part of the house. She did not hide them. She wanted
them to be seen.
  The great man arrived after the sun had set. He was driving his cattle. He
closed them up in the kraal, then returned to the house. He returned, bruised
—he had lacerations on his feet, his legs, everywhere, even on the thighs. He
had been scratched by trees, pricked by things as he fled from that rock, as he
ran and stumbled. His feet were in pain, and he was limping.
  His wife said, “What’s the matter? Why are you limping? What has
happened?”
  “No, no, I was looking for the cattle and couldn’t find them, that’s all.”
  “What happened to the cattle?”
  “They just wandered off. They went to graze far off. I was looking for
them.”
  “Oh, and you got all scratched up like that just because you were look¬
ing for the cattle?”
   “Yes.”
   “Oh.”
   She took a dish and dipped out some corn for the children; they ate the
corn, and so did the woman. This fellow poured out his roots, and his wife
said, “Just eat those roots of the kind that belongs to you, to men! My chil¬
dren and I will just eat the kind that belongs to women. As I was going
about seeking food, hungry, I found some roots of the kind that belongs to
women. You eat yours. You eat the kind that belongs to men!”
   The man had a problem. What could he do about this? Here in the
house, he could see all the things that he had hidden away in the cave. But
he could not understand how his wife could have found them. And he was
afraid: he feared that his father-in-law and others of his in-laws would
hear about this. What would they say? After all, he had come to them with
a special plea for food for his wife. Then he had nof given her any.
   This fellow was silent.
   After a long time, in the morning, he was hungry, and he said, “Oh,
Nobani, won’t you give me just a spoonful, to satisfy my heart?”
   She said, “Never! Not until you bring back to me the thing I sent you
for, the thing you were to have brought from my home! Not until you learn
to give me a full account of what happened, and say things were like this
and like that. Then I’ll give you something to eat. Then I’ll share those
things with you. But until then—never!”
   So he sat there, suffering, unable to eat anything at all.
   Time passed.
   Time passed in that \kay for this fellow, and he was very hungry. The
others in the house went on eating His wife and children continued to eat


324   ♦     1960s and 1970s
this fine food, without ever once giving him any. He was hungry. He lost
weight: hungry, drinking only milk, eating roots and nothing more, eating
resin from mimosa trees and nothing else, fighting with the monkeys over
that resin—that is all he had.
  After a while, a long while, it became clear that the supply of food at
home was diminishing.
   Then it was gone.
   One day, this man was walking, herding his cattle in the usual way, eating
this resin, and he found that the mimosa trees had been cleaned out. He had
been constantly rifling through the trees, combing through them for resin.
The day before, he had gone through these trees, and some days before that,
and now today as well. The resin had no chance to grow, to ooze out. And
the man was getting hungrier and hungrier, a little hungrier each time he
looked lor the food. He walked a great distance, seeking resin, finding none.
He traveled all day.
   Finally, he came upon a tree that contained an abundance of resin. But
there was something that was clinging to it, something that was clinging
to the mimosa tree.
   He said to it, “Get down! Who are you, clinging to this resin? Get
down. Let me get some of it!”
   The thing said, “I’ll never come down! Who are you?”
   Again this fellow tried because he could see that the resin was plentiful here.
He knew that he would be satisfied, if only he could get to the resin. He went
to some other trees in the area. He went to other trees, but then he returned.
   He looked closely at this thing.
   He said, “Say, Friend! I told you to get down from there, so that I can
get some of this resin.”
   The thing said, “No one has ever made me get down.”
   Again, he said, “Come down from that tree. If you do, I’ll let you suckle
on this cow of my home. Look, that one with the big teats. If you’ll come
down, I’ll carry you on my back.”
   The thing said, “Nobody carries me! I’m The-Clinger-I’ll-Cling-to-
You! That is my name, and I can cling to you too!”
   The man said, “No, my friend, please come down.”
   It was getting late. The sun was about to set. It was time for him to
return to his home with his cattle. But the man was vexed by hunger pangs,
and he was afraid to go home. He was hungry. He wondered how he would
be able to go to sleep in such a state.
   So he again begged, “Yo, Friend! Please come down. I’ll let you suckle on
this cow—you’ll be satisfied; the cow is in milk.” This fellow said that. Then
he went and brought a cow from among the cattle. He brought the beast close,
holding the cow, saying, “Look! Look, this cow is in milk! Come down!”
   The thing said, “I told you that I’ve never been made to come down.”
   “Come down, Friend! I’ll carry you! Please come to me. I’ll carry you—
just let me get some of that resin. Please, it’s getting late.”


                               A Man Hides Food from His Family           ♦   325
  “I’m The-Clinger-I’ll-Cling-to-You! And I can cling to you too! All
right, I’ll come down.”
  The man turned his back. He turned his back to this thing. He moved
toward it backwards, moving with his back toward the thing. Then he
removed his garment. The thing detached itself from the tree, and it clung
to the man’s back; it clung to his back. It held on tightly with its claws. It
had long claws; it held on with its claws. It had four legs, and its claws sank
into the man’s flesh. They sank into his flesh. The thing clung to this man.
  The man said, “Get down. Get off my back! Get down, get down! Get
down! Get down! Yo yo yo! I’m dying! Get down!”
  The thing said, “I told you that I should not be carried! I am The-
Clinger-I’ll-Cling-to-You! You told me to get down from that tree!”
  The man traveled then, a crumpled figure—powerless. This thing was
trying to destroy him; its claws had disappeared into his flesh. Its claws
seemed to be reaching to his very liver and lungs, reaching inside him. He
was doubled up as he walked. He was scarcely able to walk at all as he
drove his cattle. He moved slowly, and he had not even eaten any resin.
The thing had come down from the tree. It had detached itself from the
tree and then with its claws attached itself to the man—so that he was
unable to eat the resin. This thing was causing him intense pain.
  The man drove his cattle. He went home with them.
  As he was coming along, his wife said, “What’s the matter with this man
today? Why is he walking so slowly, doubled up like that?”
   The boy appeared, and he said, “I don’t know what’s the matter with
him. He’s so doubled up! I don’t know what’s the matter with him."
   “Yo!” said the wife. “He really has peculiar habits. Knotted up like that.
What’s the matter with him?”
   In time, the man entered; he came into the house, bent over in pain. He
sat in the room, but he did not come close to the others that day—he sat
at a distance.
   His wife said, “What’s the matter? Why are you sitting so far away from
us? What’s the matter now?”
   “No, no, nothing’s the matter.”                     \
   “Are you cold?”
   “No, I’m not cold.”
   “Oh! How can you not be cold? It’s not hot, yet you’re not cold!”
   “No, I’m not cold.”
   The man continued to sit over there, and the others ate their corn.
   Then the wife said, “Why don’t you roast your roots? Here’s the fire.”
   “No, really, I’m not hungry.”
   “Oh, what have you eaten?”
   “I ate some resin from the trees.”
   His wife said, “Oh, is it your practice to fill yourself with nothing but
resin? Without roasting roots?”
   “No, no, I’m full.”


326   ♦   1960s AND 1970s
   His wife did not bother him further. But when they went to sleep that
night, it was clear that something was on this man.
  While he slept, he kept saying, “Mmmh! Mmh! Mmmmmh! Mmmmmh!”
   His wife said, “Sobani! Sobani!”
   “Mm?”
   “What’s the matter?”
   “What are you talking about? I’m only dreaming.”
   “What is the matter? Why are you making such a noise? Why this
groaning? What’s the problem? Where are you aching?”
   “No, I ’m not aching at all! I’m just stretching.”
   “Mh!”
   “Nothing’s wrong.”
   “Oh.”
   Time passed for them, and when it was morning he got up and
departed. It was difficult for him to get up. He was doubled up. He walked
off slowly to let the cattle out of the kraal. And his wife and child stared
at him. He walked away, going to herd the cattle. So time passed for him.
   His wife said to the little boy, “My child, please follow your father.
Observe him. Find out what is wrong with him. He has become such a stiff
thing! Watch him. See if you can discover what it is he’s hiding. But don’t
let him know why you’re following him. Just go.”
   The child went. He walked over there with his father.
   “Go home! Go home, Child. Go home.”
   “No, Father. I’ll turn the cattle and keep them from straying.”
   “Go! Go, my child. Go home. You must be hungry.”
   “No, Father, I’m not hungry.”
   The man left him alone. The boy went about repeatedly, herding the
cattle. Whenever his father disappeared somewhere, the boy would watch
him. The child observed him when the man disappeared to one side. He
watched as his father let his garment fall, as he exposed his shoulders.
   He said, “Please come down, Friend! Please come down! Come, let me
suckle you. Here’s some milk! Yo! You’re killing me!”
  The thing said, “I told you that I’m The-Clinger-I’ll-Cling-to-You! I’m
not to be carried on the back!”
  As soon as he saw the thing that was on his father, the child ran. He
headed for home. He arrived there and went to his mother.
  “Mama! I’ve seen the thing that’s on Father! He’s got something that’s
monstrous! It’s on his back! He keeps saying, ‘Come down, Friend! I’m dying!
Get down! It’s painful!’ And that thing says to my father, ‘I told you! I said
that I’m not to be carried on the back! I’m The-Clinger-I’ll-Cling-to-You!’
Father’s all swollen! The thing that is clinging to Father is causing him pain!”
  The mother of the child said, “Be quiet, my child. Don’t speak of this again.”
  The child sat then, and the man herded his cattle the whole day, not
realizing that his secret had been discovered. Because of the pain, he was
no longer even digging up roots. He was bent over. He went home. He


                              A Man Hides Food from His Family          ♦   327
took the cattle home. When he arrived, he shut the cattle in the kraal, then
went to the house. He sat down.
  His wife dipped out some corn and ate. When she had eaten her corn,
she gave some to her children. And they ate.
  “Why don’t you roast the roots?” she asked. “Why dont you eat over there
on your side of the hearth?”
  The man said, “No, I’m full.”
   “What are you full of?”
   “Resin.”
   “Oh, what kind of resin is this, that you’re full day after day? You don’t
eat here at all.”
   “No, there’s nothing.”
   “Why are you so doubled up? You can’t walk properly! You even have
difficulty wrapping yourself in your cape! You can’t make your bed! What s
gripping you? What part of your body is aching?”
   “No, there’s nothing wrong with me! There’s nothing wrong with me!”
   “Mm?”
   “There’s nothing wrong with me!”
   The woman closed the door and said, “You’re going to tell me what’s
wrong with you! What is the matter with you?”
   The man lacked strength because of what this thing was doing to him, so
he gave in at last, and said, “Well, Nobani, just sit down here. I’ll tell you.”
   His wife sat.
   “I was eating resin, Nobani. And while I was eating it, I suddenly saw
something that was clinging to me. This thing had attached itself to me. It
clawed me. It refused to get down. It tortured me. Now I’m swollen. This
thing is painful—it’s painful!”
   “When did this happen?”
   “Yo! On some day or other.”
   “Why didn’t you tell me about it? What’s this all about? How can it be that
you took such a creature from a tree? You worthless thing! You low person! I send
this miserable thing to my home, and it proceeds to eat the food in a secret cave!
And now, you go about getting these things from trees and putting them on your
body! What kind ot brain is that? Now uncover yourself. Let’s see this thing.”
   The wife uncovered him and found that her husband was badly swollen
—with this weird thing clinging to him, sinking its claws into him. This
thing was alive.
   The woman said to the thing, “Get down! Get out of here!”
   The thing said, “I will not come down! I have said that I’m The-Clinger-
I’ll-Cling-to-You!”
   “Yo!”
   The woman wondered what she should do. Her husband would die at
the hands of this thing. She boiled some oil, she boiled some oil. She
heated it. She heated tha oil, and it was very very hot.
   Then she said, “Get down!”


328   ♦    1960s and 1970s
  The man uncovered himself, and the woman quickly poured the oil. She
poured hot oil on this thing.
  Yo! The thing now began to peel off. It peeled off along with the man’s
flesh. Then it fell to the ground. The woman killed it and threw it outside.
Then she began to heal her husband, and he became well again.
  When the man was healed, the wife repeatedly assailed him for the
things he had done, those despicable things.
  This man went out and again herded his cattle as he had in the past—
herding the cattle, digging roots.
   One day, something said to him, “Please give me a root.”
  It turned out to be a person who had only one arm.
  The man looked at this person, and said, “What’s happened to this per¬
son, a person with only one arm who goes about saying that he should be
given a root? What kind of person is this? He has only one side!”
   The thing said, “You too could come to have only one side! Just give me
some roots. I am unable to dig for roots.”
   This fellow refused. He said, “Go on! I don’t have time for that!”
   He said, “Come and sit by me. You’ll see better that I have no arm.”
   The man approached, and when he came near to this creature: “Oh, this
person does resemble a human being, except that he has only one arm,
there’s only one eye! One leg! And the thing doesn’t move from this place!
He has only one finger on his hand, one finger with a long nail!”
   The man squatted then and dug for roots. And this thing suddenly
moved its nail, and ripped off the man’s rectum, throwing it over there.
   It threw the man’s rectum over there.
   This fellow said, “Yo! Dear friends, what is this that I’ve come to now?
What will my wife think of me?”
   Then he ran. He headed over there—and his rectum was making a
noise: “Hooooooo! Hooooooooo!” Each time he took a step: “Hooooooo!”
When he ran, his rectum moaned: “Wo wo wo wo wo!” And when he stood
still: “Woooooooo!” And when he ran: “Wo wo wo wo!”
   He said, “What am I to do now? And my wife! Today I am bringing yet
another problem to her. She just finished with that other thing that was on me!”
   This fellow took his garment then. He took his cape and tore one side of it.
He stuffed it into his rectum. He stuffed it—stuffing it, molding it into the
shape of a rectum. And he put it where his rectum should have been. He made
it firm, so that it would stop making this noise. Then he went on his way.
   Again, as he neared home, he heard the sound: “Wooooooo!” So he
again stuffed a part of his garment into his rectum. “Wo wo wo wo wo!”
He tore the garment once more, the cape gradually diminishing in size
because he had been tearing and stuffing it. That thing was heard making
the noise, and again he tore the garment and stuffed it into his rectum.
   “Well, my cape is getting smaller.”
   The garment was indeed getting smaller, and finally there was only
enough material left for settling on his shoulders, then the neck      it was as


                                A Man Hides Food from His Family         ♦   329
if it were a mere scarf now. The fellow went on his way and arrived at his
home. He put the livestock into the kraal.
  His child said, “Mama! Mama! Just look at Father! He has no clothes!
He’s naked!”
  H is mother said, “What’s the matter with him now?”
  “Just look at him!”
  His mother appeared in the doorway.
  “Well, what’s the matter with this man? Why is he naked?”
  The man secured the livestock in the kraal, but he was afraid to go to
the house—afraid of his wife. So he tarried, moving about here and there
on the outside. He did that until it was dark, then he went into the house.
As he was entering, his wife said, “What’s the matter with you? Why are
you naked? What has happened to your clothes?”
  “Well, this is how it happened. While I was rounding up the cattle, I got
caught on a tree stump. My clothes were torn and were left behind there.
Then, when I was chasing the cattle at another place, my cape tore and
remained in a thicket over there, among thorny trees. I was pricked by
those thorns. The shrubs clung to the garment. My clothes were ruined!”
  The woman said, “Heeee! I’ll find out about this! I’ll find out what kind
of man we have here! This is a strange man that we’ve got here in this
house. I can’t understand him.”
  Time passed for this woman, and the man went to sleep. The woman
loaned him a garment, and he went to sleep.
  In the morning, she took the garment back, and said, “Go, go with that
rag of yours!”
  When the husband had taken the livestock out and he was going down
the hill below the kraal: “Wooooooooooooo!”
  His wife said, “What’s making that noise?” She and the child listened.
  The cattle were very troublesome that day, straying this way and that.
The man frequently had to run to turn them around, to bring them back.
As he rounded up the cattle on this side, as he pursued them, this thing
would make that noise: “Wo wo wo wo!” with each step that he took.
  She said, “Heeee! Something’s moaning, it’s coming from this man!
This is a mystery!”
  The man went on. He gradually brought the livestock together. He
herded the cattle; he herded and herded. Then he went to that thing.
  He went over there and found that thing sitting—that person with one
arm, with one eye, one leg, the person with one finger on his hand—and
one long nail.
  “Hello there, sir.”
  “Yes?”
  “Please give me back my rectum. My clothing is finished.”
  The thing said, “Come here so that you can see me better, so that you
can see that I’m a human (being. Because when you’re standing over there,
you can’t see so well. Please come here.”


330   ♦   1960s AND 1970s
  The man said, “When I came close to you before, you tore off my rec¬
tum. And now my clothes are gone. I ask you to give me back my rectum.”
  The thing said, “I said, please come here.”
  But this fellow refused to approach. He was in great pain because of this
thing.
  He went and herded his cattle. In time, he turned them around and
went home. All the while, his rectum kept making that noise. And he
stuffed it with cloth, again tearing off a piece of what remained of his gar¬
ment. He stuffed it into his rectum; he stuffed it, he stuffed it.
   Finally, he came to his home. He closed the cattle in the kraal, then
went to the house. The woman closed the door behind him. He stood there
in the doorway.
   She said, “Now tell me, what’s making that noise? You’re going to tell
me about it today!”
   Her husband said, “Mhmm! This is what happened to me, Nobani. While
I was digging roots the other day, I encountered someone. Now this person
told me to give him some roots. I said that I had none, but he kept begging
me. I asked him who he was. And he told me to approach so that I could see
that he was really a person. I went to him, and while I was digging, he sud¬
denly ripped off my rectum! But this person wasn’t a proper human being!
He had only one arm, one leg. He had one hand, one finger—with one long
nail. Now, when I left that place, my rectum began to make a noise. So I tore
off a piece of this garment, and that’s how it came to be finished.”
   “Oh!”
   “Yes.”
   “All right then, this is what you must do. Give me your garment,” said
his wife, “and I’ll take the cattle out tomorrow morning. You remain
behind. And if you should happen to go out of the house, pretend to be
some other person. Loan me your garments, and your knitted hat, and that
bag of yours, the stick for digging roots.”
   “Oh!”
   Well then, the next day, in the morning, the wife went about the busi¬
ness very purposefully, taking a stick, taking an axe, the digging stick, the
man’s clothing, his knitted hat, the bag into which the roots would be put.
And the woman went on her way, taking the cattle out to the pasture.
   The woman traveled, going out with the oxen in the customary way. When
she had gone off with the cattle, she herded them out there on the veld.
   She had said to her husband, “Don’t come along.” He was to keep his
distance, and he did indeed stay far behind.
   She traveled. The woman went ahead. She walked a long way, herding
these cattle, walking, digging for the roots, until she finally came within
sight of this thing. When she saw it, she continued walking, digging, get¬
ting closer and closer to it, approaching it little by little.
   This thing said, “Just give me a root.”
   The woman said, “Oh, who are you to say that I should give you a root?


                               A Man Hides Food from His Family        ♦   331
  The thing said, “Please come here. Come to me, and see for yourself.
You’ll see that I’m a person, and you’ll know me and give me some roots.”
  The woman said, “Well, I know that you’re a person. I can see that. As
for the roots that I’ve been digging up—I’ve got responsibilities. I need
them for my family at home. I didn’t dig them up for you. But I’ll give
them to you on one condition—that you not insist upon them, that you not
demand them forcefully.”
  This thing said, “All right, I won’t demand them forcefully. I say to you,
please give me those roots.”
  The woman said, “I’ll give them to you if you follow my custom. You
must turn around and ask for them with your back toward me. And I too,
I’ll respond to you with my back toward you. We’ll approach each other in
that way. Then, when I get to you, I’ll turn around and face you.”
   So this thing turned around. Its back was toward her. The woman
watched carefully.
  The thing said, “I say, give me those roots.”
  The woman walked slowly, and she said, “Yes, I’ll give you the roots
when you ask me for them, when you beg me. I’m digging them up for the
people of my home who are in dire need of food.”
  The thing said, “I’m in dire need, too. I’m very hungry. But I don’t have
a digging stick.”
  The woman said, “I have a digging stick. If you follow my custom, I’ll
give you roots.”
  This thing said, “I’ll follow your custom.”
  Little by little, she was getting nearer.
  “I’ll follow your custom, yes.”
  The woman said, “When I hit against you with my back, I’ll go around
to the front of you. Only then can you have the roots.”
  The thing said, “All right, fine. Hit against me; let it happen. Hit
against me, behind me, then I’ll see you finally when you come around to
the front.”
  The woman came to the thing in that way—it still had its back to her.
But she came straight to it. She did not turn her back to it. She did not
move backward as she had said she would. But it had its back to her, not
looking at her, not seeing her.
  When she got to this thing, she cut off its head. With a cutter, with the
axe that she was carrying.
  And she found her husband’s rectum, just sitting there. The thing was
not being especially careful to guard the rectum, so desperate was it to get
the roots.
  She took the rectum, then called her husband.
  The thing was dead.
  She said, “Sobani! Sobani!”
  The man responded,        \
  She said, “Come and see where you left your rectum.”


332   ♦   1960s AND 1970s
  The man came, running hard. He arrived and found that the thing was dead.
His wife was now carrying this rectum in her hand. She pulled the rags from
her husband’s buttocks and replaced his rectum. It fit tightly. Then she threw
the rags away, and they left that creature there. They returned to their home.
They went, going home with the cattle, going together now, looking for roots.
  The man said, “Yo! My wife, you’ve really helped me! It’s not the first
time either. You’ve been helping me for a long time! But today, I’ve learned
my lesson. I’ll never go near such a thing again. All day, I’ve been remem¬
bering the time I was pursued by that stone that you threw at me when I
returned from my in-laws’. I returned deceitfully, hiding the food that had
been prepared for you. I also recall the day when I was almost dead of
hunger because of what I had done. Then I peeled off The-Clinger-I’ll-
Cling-to-You from the resin, and it settled on my back. I groaned with it
for a whole year. I was in great pain! Then, today, I was called by a thing
that was lying on the ground, a thing that I did not recognize, a thing that
demanded that I give it roots. In that situation, too, I was helped by you. I
shall never go against your commands again, my wife.”
   Time passed, and they came to their home. When they got home, they
closed up the cattle and went into the house. They roasted the roots; they
drank milk.
   The man was ingratiating himself with his wife now. He did not want
these things to be mentioned—the things that he had done, the things that
had happened to him. In particular, he did not want his in-laws to learn of
his actions, of the contemptible things that he had been doing.
   Again and again, he said, “My wife, don’t mention that, please!”
   His wife said, “I’m really disgusted with you. I loathe you because—”
   “No! No, don’t talk about that!”
   So they were happy. The man began to have confidence in her because
the woman had more brains than he had.


                                   Transcribed and translated by Harold Scheub




              Gladys Thomas, FALL TOMORROW
                          South Africa 1972      English


Poet, dramatist, and short-story writer, Gladys Thomas was born to Dorothy
Adams (nee Claythorne) and John Adams in 1935 in Salt River, Cape Town. Upon
completion of primary school she worked in a factory until she married. As the
child of an interracial union, Thomas’s identity as a “Coloured” was to become sig¬
nificant for her passage as a writer in South Africa. Also important would be her
marriage to a man whose political and literary activity would intensify her experi¬
ence of apartheid. (Albert Thomas was detained under the Terrorism Act for his
involvement in an underground movement, the Coloured People’s Congress.)


                                                      Fall Tomorrow        ♦   333
Thomas’s sensitivity to the pain and suffering around her, however, made her an
activist in her own right. She regularly participated in protest marches, was detained
for chaining herself to the gates of parliament, and shared the stage with now-
prominent political figures like Trevor Manuel of the African National Congress.
   The poem reprinted here is, among other things, an inspired condemnation of
the Group Areas Act of 1950 and its numerous amendments, which removed peo¬
ple from their homes and displaced nonwhites to barren and isolated areas.
Thomas said in a recent interview that the poem was written in a single train ride:
“I didn’t know I could write but when the Group Areas Act forced our family out
of Simonstown ... I wrote ‘Fall Tomorrow’ in retaliation.” Simonstown—the sea¬
side town in which Thomas and her family lived, and in which Albert Thomas had
been born—was declared a white group area, and all nonwhites had to leave. Those
classified as “Coloured” were moved to an area called Ocean View, which, despite
its name, offered only a view of endless “seas of sand.” The term “yellow monsters”
refers to the bulldozers that were used to overrule any refusal to leave; local chil¬
dren tried to defy them by destroying houses before they could be bulldozed. These
same children, Thomas says today, are among those “living lost lives.”
   “Fall Tomorrow” originally appeared in 1972 in a volume called Cry Rage! along
with several of her other poems and a larger number by James Matthews. As
Thomas said, “Poems were real weapons.” The government’s perception of the
threat they represented resulted in the banning of Cry Rage! in 1973. It was the
first book of poetry to be banned in South Africa.
  Through the 1970s and 1980s Thomas continued to write poetry, fiction, and
reportage, winning literary awards. In 1978 she was included on the Kwanzaa list
of black women writers noted for opposing apartheid in their writing, and in 1983
she received a fellowship at Iowa University’s International Writers’ Program. She
is one of the founding members of the Congress of South African Writers.
                                                                     Candice Petersen


                                         ♦

   Don’t sow a seed,
  don’t paint a wall,
  tomorrow it will have to fall.


   Let the dog howl and bark,
  tomorrow he will
  sleep in the dark.
  Let the cock crow,
  let the hen lay,
  tomorrow will be their last day.


  Let the children chop trees,
  let them break,
  let the destructive little devils
  ruin and take;             *
  for tomorrow they know not their fate.


334   ♦   1960s and 1970s
  Don’t sow a seed,
  don’t paint a wall,
  tomorrow the yellow monster will take all.


  Let our sons dazed in eye
  rape and steal
  for they are not allowed to feel.
  Let our men drink,
  let them fight,
  let what is said about them
  then be right,
  for they are not allowed to think.


  So bark, howl, crow,
  chop, break, ruin,
  steal, drink, fight.
  Let what’s made of us be right.


  Tomorrow we gaze at a new view,
   seas of sand given by you.
  And we say:
   sow the seed,
   paint the wall,
   be at home in our desert for all.
   You that remade us
   your mould will break
   and tomorrow you are going to fall!




                                //Ukxa NIa’an,
           The Old People Give You Life
                             Botswana 1972        Ju/’hoansi


This version of a widespread Ju/’hoan San folktale was told by //Ukxa N!aan (Old
//Ukxa) in Dobe, Botswana, in 1972. The tale gives a dramatic indication of the
importance of old people in the lives of these formerly hunting-gathering people.
Although the Ju/’hoan people do not keep count of their own ages in an absolute
sense, they show great concern with relative age in their relationships. Reflected in
respectful terms of address, seniority in any relationship between two people is
accorded small but real prerogatives. The older one becomes, the greater the number
of relationships in which one is the elder, and the more respect one is accorded. An
“old” stage of life is distinguished linguistically by the suffix “!a’an,” which is applied
to those who are no longer bearing or begetting children, but who may still be active
and vigorous.


                                         The Old People Give You Life              ♦   335
   Many old people among the Ju/’hoansi are vigorous and independent. Even
when they begin to grow frail, their society does not condone the ageism found in
some other parts of the world today. They are cared for by those in whom they have
invested a lifetime of gifts and services, their children and other young relatives.
This tale reflects the mystical connectedness between the grandparental generation
and the youngest Ju/’hoansi, a connectedness honored by their tradition of name¬
sakes. In a very real sense, the oldest Ju/’hoan people “become” the youngest, giving
their very identities to the children of their offspring. In this story, the metaphor of
the girl who grew in secret, tended by her grandmother, is the tenderest of tropes
for intergenerational caring. The old make for themselves a kind of immortality
through investing in younger individuals; literally, they “give you life.”
                                                                         Megan Biesele


                                          ♦

. . . Now the elephant girl had already warned her grandmother that some¬
thing might happen to her. She said, “. . . Watch well: a little wind will come
to you. The little wind will come to you with something in it. It will bring
you some droplets of blood. The blood will come to lodge inside your groin.
Take that bit of blood and put it into a container. Don’t let on what you’re
doing-—-just take it and put it into something. Something like a little dish
or a little bottle.” ... It happened just as the girl had said. A little wind
came back to her grandmother. The little bit of blood came to lodge in her
groin. The grandmother saw it and said, “Didn’t the child tell me something
like this would happen?” She didn’t speak aloud, she just said this in her
heart. She took the drops of blood and put them in a bottle. . . . Then she
sat and thought, and asked herself, “Should I go to see what has happened
to my granddaughter? No, it has already happened just as she said it would,
so he must have killed her already and there’s no help for it.” Meanwhile the
bit of blood was growing. It grew and grew until it was too big for the bot¬
tle. Then the grandmother took it out and put it in a skin bag. It grew again
and burst the bag, so the grandmother put it into something bigger. Then
it grew some more and broke that. Only the grandmother knew about it. No
one else knew that she had the elephant girl and wa$ restoring her to life.
She kept it a secret. She had the bit of blood and it grew and she fixed it,
and it grew some more and she fixed it. When it had grown completely it
was a woman again! She looked just like she had before.
   One morning when the camp awoke, the women decided to go gathering
berries. They got up and went picking berries. The elephant girl’s little
daughter went with them, saying, “Today I’ll accompany my aunts and eat
berries.” The old grandmother said, “Go ahead, go with them.” So the ele¬
phant girl’s mother and all the other women went gathering. The old woman
stayed home alone. She spent the day quietly. In the afternoon she took a
skin and spread it in the shade, spread it in the late afternoon shadows. Then
she took out the elephant girl and sat her upon the skin. She ground ochre and
spread it on the young woman’s face. She replaced her old rags with soft, new


336   ♦   1960s and 1970s
skin clothing and hung her all over with ornaments. Then the old woman tied
copper rings in her granddaughter’s hair the way people used to tie them long
ago. She fixed her up so that she was the beautiful elephant girl again.
   Later the women came back from gathering. Towards sunset they returned.
The old woman was telling funny stories and the elephant girl was laughing.
As they came near the village, her little daughter said to the others, “Who’s
that laughing just like my mother in the village?”
  Her aunt said, “How can you be so crazy? My older sister died a long
time ago. Don’t go saying you hear her laughing someplace.”
  Another woman said, “My aunt is certainly dead: this child is crazy.”
  So they came closer, listening. The elephant girl laughed again. This
time they said, “Can it be? Whose laughter is this? When we left there was
nobody but the old woman in the camp; we had all gone gathering. What
young girl can that be whose laughter sounds just like our sister’s?” When
they came into the camp they saw the elephant girl sitting there with her
grandmother. Her daughter cried, “Mother, mother, mother!” and ran to
her, flopped down, and began to nurse. The others cried out and said, “Yo!
Who has accomplished this?”
 The young woman answered softly, “Granny, of course. Granny lifted
me up. Granny spoke the word and I sat up and was alive. If it had been
up to you others alone, I wouldn’t be here. Long ago Granny took me and
sheltered me in a skin pouch and now I am alive again. That’s how it was.
The old people give you life.”

                                   Transcribed and translated by Megan Biesele




                Nehambo Magdalena Shamena,
                   Emergency Call from
                  the Women of Namibia
                           Namibia 1973      Afrikaans


Nehambo Magdalena Iihuhua, born into the royal family of Ondonga, was edu¬
cated in Lutheran mission schools and graduated from the Okahao Women
Teachers Training College in 1956. She thus belonged to the tiny number of
Owambo women who obtained a professional qualification at that time.
   She and her husband, Ndeulimane Erastus Shamena, joined the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) shortly after it was founded in 1960.
Their activism led to increasing conflict with the South African colonial authori¬
ties. Erastus Shamena was arrested in 1967 and spent a year in prison in Pretoria.
In 1973 he was arrested again. Magdalena Shamena and her husband wrote of
these traumatic events in an autobiography, We Children of Namibia.
   In the early 1970s, Owambo chiefs aligned with the colonial authorities sub¬
jected Namibian women and men indiscriminately to floggings while the South


                   Emergency Call from the Women of Namibia               ♦   337
African authorities subjected Namibians to torture in detention. In           1973
Magdalena Shamena, then secretary to the Women’s League of Namibia, wrote to
the secretary general of the United Nations. This letter, smuggled out of the coun¬
try by a Finnish missionary, became known as the “Emergency Call from the
Women of Namibia.” She signed the letter, the first known piece of writing by a
Namibian woman involved in the national liberation struggle, to foreground the
experience of women. She signed with her full name, an exceptionally brave act in
the repressive climate of that time.
   Her resistance was not tolerated by the South African administration and the
increasing threats eventually caused the Shamenas’ flight into exile. Along with
thousands of other Namibians, Magdalena and Erastus Shamena departed their
country in 1974, leaving their six young children behind in the care of their
mother’s brother. Magdalena Shamena became one of the first SWAPO women to
undergo military training in Zambia.
                                                                      Heike Becker


                                        ♦

Hear our cry in need. We are being tortured here in Namibia in secret, but
because we live in isolation we have not the possibility to make our need
known and if we succeed to do so we are tortured by the South African
government.
  We, the women of Namibia, have hard times.
  Many of our children are now in jail. Many of them are burned with
electricity and many of them have been killed.
  Now, from August 15, 1973, nearly all freedom-fighters are put in jails
which burn them like hot grillpans. These jails are built with corrugated
iron only and are standing in the burning sun. Those inside turned pale
because of the heat and we fear what can happen to them.
  The women of Namibia are beaten and tortured very much, e.g. Anneli
Dama, and others. The women are ordered to lie on their stomach and then
they are beaten shamelessly. Some of them are still in jail and suffer a lot.
  The freedom-fighters are being beaten up by the Chiefs. When the
South African government could not bring in any charges against these
men they were sent to the Chiefs who had beaten them with palm sticks,
15-20 strokes, e.g. Andreas Nuukwawo, J. Nangutwala, and others received
as many strokes.
  Heavy laws are being put into practice against the teachers to prevent
them from active political involvement. Many of them lose their work
without knowing the reasons why—-Jonathan Shoombe, Valde Nampunya,
John Otto, Shikondjeleni Vatuva, Engobe and many others.


                                                             Translator unknown


                             *




338   ♦   1960s AND 1970s
         Joyce Simango, WOMEN ARE WEALTH
                           Zimbabwe 1974        chiShona


The first woman Shona novelist, Joyce Simango was not aware that she was breaking
new ground when she wrote her novel Zviuya Zviri Mberi (For a Better Tomorrow) in
1974. Cut off from village life at Honde Mission School in the Eastern districts where
her husband taught, Simango found herself with little to do except housework. She was
a voracious reader and got her supply of books from the mission bookshop. Listening to
a radio program, “Mabhuku naVanyori,” run by the Rhodesia Literature Bureau and the
Rhodesian Broadcasting Corporation, where authors read from their own published
works and listeners were encouraged to send in manuscripts to be considered for publi¬
cation, she developed a desire to write. She wrote in an environment of educated and
supportive people. Her husband helped with hand-printing the manuscript as required
by the publishers.
    Simango wrote about a rebellious wile, Munhamo (No Freedom from Trouble),
who runs away with her nine-year-old daughter, Tambudzai (The Troubled One),
in order to save her from marriage to an old man. Her lather, Munhamo’s husband,
wants to exchange his daughter for the bride-wealth he needs to buy his sixth wife.
Tambudzai, brought up as a Christian, is enrolled in school; after successfully
completing her studies, she trains as a nurse, then marries an educated, profes¬
sional Christian. When asked what influenced her to choose the theme of this
novel, Simango named her family background and her belief in Christianity. In its
portrayal of patriarchal social relations, her novel may be seen as an antecedent to
Nervous Conditions by Tsitsi Dangarembga.
   Born in 1948, the eldest child in the family, Simango has confessed to an
unhappy childhood. Her father had eight wives and her mother had been pledged
to him at a very early age. Her mother had been the eldest of the cowives, but
when she was divorced, she left Simango in the care of one of the other wives. At
fifteen, after completing her primary education, Simango married a man who came
from Mozambique and taught in the school she attended. The extract from Zviuya
Zviri Mberi that has been translated here is from the beginning of the novel.
                                                               Chiedza Musengezi


                                          ♦

On a very cold winter’s dawn, a Tuesday, Munhamo and her two children,
Tambudzai and Chemwandoita, sat shivering in their hut. Munhamo, who
was weeping, was wrapped in a shawl which she used as a blanket as well.
   On the other side of the hut Tambudzai and Chemwandoita sat by the
fireplace. Tambudzai had a shawl covering just the lower part of her body
while her chest was completely bare. Chemwandoita had only a piece of
cloth tied around his waist and this was all they had in the way of clothes.
   Munhamo was of light complexion and medium height and one could
easily see the resemblance between her and her daughter. She was still

                                                    Women Are Wealth ♦ 339
youthful even though Tambudzai, her first-born, was now nine years old,
for she had married young. Her son, Chemwandoita, was six. Munhamo
was the fourth wife of Nhamoinesu, and though other children had been
born to her, none had survived except these two.
   They lived in Nyamhinda in the        Portuguese country in     the   east.
Nhamoinesu’s wives earned their living through tilling the land and they
had to provide their own clothing by bartering the maize they grew.
Nhamoinesu was quite different from other married men who bought
clothes for their families. In all he had five wives, the fifth he had only
recently married. And he had already pledged Tambudzai in marriage so as
to raise the money to pay the bride-wealth of his youngest wife.
  The day was approaching when Tambudzai would leave for the home of
the new husband to whom she had been pledged, and therefore Munhamo
was weeping. But Tambudzai was quite happy, unaware of what was about
to take place.
  While Munhamo was so full of distress she heard a voice.
   “May we come in, please!” It was a man’s voice accompanied by hand
clapping.
   “Come in!” Munhamo replied, wiping away her tears. The man entered
carrying a small hare in his hands.
   “Receive it, Tambudzai,” said her mother. Tambudzai simply accepted it
and placed it against the wall of the hut.
   “No,” said the man, “to be sure there’s nothing here to be very grateful
for. It’s just a small hare caught in one of my stone-traps which I’ve just
been checking, and I thought of coming to give it to Amainini Tambudzai.”
  “Thank you,” said Munhamo, clapping her hands. “By the way, did I ask
how you are this morning?”
  “No, we have slept well. How about you?” the man replied.
  “It’s just these coughs. How are the others at home?”
  “They have just gone out. How are you, Tambudzai?” the man asked,
looking at her.
  “I’m well and how are you?” Tambudzai replied, her head tilted side¬
ways. The man was so very old that Tambudzai appeared like his grand¬
daughter beside him. His name was Mundogara and he also had five wives,
being the same age as Nhamoinesu. He had provided Nhamoinesu with
the money to pay the bride-wealth for his fifth wife, and in return
Nhamoinesu had promised to give him Tambudzai as a wife. Mundogara
had replied with the proverb, “Accept whatever is offered to you as a gift,”
and so he intended to take Tambudzai and bring her up in his household.
  “Is father awake?” Mundogara asked.
  “I don’t know! Let me send a child to check for you.” Munhamo looked
at Chemwandoita who quickly ran off and returned in a flash.
  “Did you find him?” mother asked.
  “Amainini said he has gone fishing.”
  “It’s all right. I’ll go and see him there at the river,” said Mundogara,


340   ♦   1960s and 1970s
getting up from his seat. After Mundogara had left, Munhamo started
weeping again.
   “Mother, why are you crying so much?” Tambudzai asked, she and her
brother looking into her mother’s face. Munhamo continued to sob, but in
a little while she said, “Tambudzai my child, on Saturday that man who has
just left this hut will come to take you to live with him forever as his wife.”
   “Why?” Tambudzai asked.
   “My child, your father pledged you because he wanted money to pay the
bride-wealth of his youngest wife, your junior aunt.”
   Tambudzai surprisingly didn’t ask any more questions and remained
silent, looking into the fire. No one could tell from her expression what
was going on in her mind. Munhamo roused her from her reverie by send¬
ing her to fetch water from the well, which was some distance away. She
walked very slowly, thinking about what her mother had said, and tears ran
down her cheeks at the thought of having to leave her mother.
  Her mother meanwhile was busy thinking of what to do. She was
determined that she was not going to let her daughter go. This family, she
said to herself, doesn’t like me. I bear children whom they kill through
witchcraft and my husband seldom comes into my hut. And now they want
to take my child, the one who is so dear to me and so young. Over my dead
body, I swear by my mother of the Shava totem! Let them take Shoorai,
the daughter of Mwandionesa. I won’t let mine go. As for that old man and
his small hare, does he think I can get excited about that? Well, at least he
has done one good thing, provided me with something to eat on the road
I intend to take. While she talked to herself like that she heard her hus¬
band speaking to Tambudzai, who had just returned from the well.
   “Is your mother in her hut?”
   “I don’t know. But I left her there when I went to the well. She said she
had a headache,” Tambudzai replied.
  “May we enter, please,” said Nhamoinesu.
  “Come in, please,” replied Munhamo, almost choking with her sup¬
pressed anger mixed with her sobs.
   “How have you slept? Tambudzai tells me that you have a headache.”
   Tambudzai had actually lied. She was afraid that her father, finding her
mother with red eyes, would guess what she was weeping for and in his
anger beat her. Among other things he was an accomplished wife-beater
and would batter her hard even for a slight offense.
  “My eyes are paining me,” she said with her head lowered.
  “I will go and look for some herbs to ease the pain shortly, but the matter
that brought me here is this: I was planning that tomorrow you will pound
maize and rice which we’ll eat on Saturday together with Tambudzai’s hus¬
band, and you should prepare a pot of beer as well for the same occasion. But
if you have a headache, your senior co-wives can do that and I 11 slaughter
that small black goat. Do you understand?”
   “You are the father,” his wife replied, lowering her head to look at the


                                                Women Are Wealth        ♦   341
ground his feet stood on. Lowering one’s head was a custom practised by
women: it showed that they were in agreement with what their men-folk said.
      Nhamoinesu then went off towards his youngest wife’s hut. His home¬
stead was very large, built in a circle consisting of many huts for his daugh¬
ters-in-law and his sons. The huts were built of poles and dagga and had
thatched roofs. In this home meat was eaten only by elders. The young boys,
when they caught just a small mouse in their stone-traps, would eat it at
night under the cover of darkness, afraid that the leaders might snatch it
from them. Nhamoinesu did not possess much livestock, only ten head of
cattle and eight goats. His real wealth was the women. When he intended to
marry another wife, he would first of all pledge one of his daughters so that
he could raise the money to pay the bride-wealth.
      Sometimes he would even marry using the mutengano custom, whereby
he would exchange one of his daughters for a girl from another family who
would become his wife. He had fathered ten daughters and thirteen sons,
many of whom were already married. The land where this family lived was
part of a very wide plain, so flat that if you looked around in all directions
you would not see even the smallest hill.
  There was no school or grinding mill nearby and only one small store.
Nhamoinesu’s wives had to pound maize to produce mealie-meal, while
rapoko they had to grind. Although Tambudzai was only nine years old,
she was already an expert in pounding and grinding grain.
  When Nhamoinesu had gone, Munhamo called Tambudzai and asked
her to pound some rice, and when that was done they cooked some sadza
for lunch, but nobody enjoyed eating it. What was left was put together
with the rice in a reed basket. The hare they prepared nicely roasted so that
the meat turned reddish brown in a way that made one’s mouth water, it
was so appetizing. They caught two of their chickens and slaughtered and
cooked them and put these together with the rice and the roasted meat in
the basket. All this was done without attracting the attention of others in
the homestead, and while the two children saw everything, they were not
aware of the purpose behind it all.
  The night was clear and starlit when Munhamo went outside to check
whether the homestead was asleep. There wasn’t a sound except for the
faint rustle of the grass in a light breeze blowing from the east.
  She stood for a while going over the details of the plan she had made.
She had determined to flee to a place in the west called Rusitu on the bor¬
der between the British and Portuguese territories. Her uncle, her mother’s
brother, lived there, and although she did not know the way, she argued
that she could not get wholly lost when there were people to ask about her
route. Having finally made up her mind she went back into her hut and
quietly woke her children. “Tambudzai! Chemwandoita! Wake up!”
  “What is it, mother?” Tambudzai asked.
  “Wake up and let’s go.’i
                                            Translated by Chiedza Musengezi

342     ♦   1960s and 1970s
     Jennifer Davids, POEM FOR My MOTHER
                           South Africa 1974       English


Born in Cape Town in 1945 to an insurance agent father and a working mother,
Jennifer Davids attended Harold Cressy High School and trained as a teacher at
Hewat Training College, specializing in art. She later taught in Langa, a black
township in Cape Town. Now living in England where she still teaches, she is cur¬
rently working on a project she hopes to publish in South Africa.
   “When something’s on the page, it doesn’t belong to you any more,” she said in a
December 2000 interview, responding to critics’ reactions to her work. Davids’s pol¬
itics were often called into question during the height of the Black Consciousness
Movement, and more recently, too. As Grant Farred comments, she has been hard
to “locate on the map of disenfranchised writers” because of her “inability, or refusal,
to declare her colouredness.”
   The poem reprinted here was published in 1974 in Searchingfor Words but written
much earlier during her teens. Although she now sees her parents as supportive and
proud of her, the poem presents a dismissive mother, which Davids has explained as
a crystalization of “teenage angst” and petulance. While Davids’s other poetry       writ¬
ten during the period when she attended politicized poetry readings and Black
Consciousness meetings—often refers to contemporary politics of apartheid, she
maintains a preference for expressing political awareness “in a quiet way.”
                                                                       Candice Petersen


                                           ♦


   That isn’t everything, you said
   on the afternoon I brought a poem
   to you hunched over the washtub
   with your hands
   the shrivelled
   burnt granadilla
   skin of your hands
   covered by foam.


   And my words
   slid like a ball
   of hard blue soap
   into the tub
   to be grabbed and used by you
   to rub the clothes.


   A poem isn’t all
   there is to life, you said

                                                   Poem for My Mother            ♦    343
   with your blue-ringed gaze
   scanning the page
   once looking over my shoulder
   and back at the immediate
   dirty water


   and my words
   being clenched
   smaller and
   smaller.




                   Winnie Madikizela Mandela,
      Detention Alone Is a Trial in Itself
                           South Africa 1975       English


Winnie Madikizela Mandela’s involvement in South African resistance politics
began with her marriage to Nelson Mandela, imprisoned for life in 1963 and
released in 1990. For the twenty-seven years that her husband was in prison,
Winnie Mandela was persecuted by the state. She was banned, imprisoned, and
banished. Her suffering became a living symbol of apartheid oppression, and her
courageous spirit made her an icon for struggle. She became an independent polit¬
ical leader in her own right.
   In 1969 she and twenty-one others suffered detention under the draconian
Terrorism Act. This permitted 180 days of detention for interrogation under con¬
ditions of solitary confinement. She was held in this condition for seventeen
months. She and the others were eventually charged under the Suppression of
Communism Act for furthering the aims of a banned organization. Although
acquitted, she was banned and placed under house arrest, which meant reporting to
the police daily and being at home from six in the evening until six in the morning.
   During the brief two-week period between the acquittal and the imposition of
the banning order, she took the opportunity to speak publicly at a meeting held to
protest the detention system. She spoke about the system of detention and about
her personal experience. She knew that the risks of rearrest and further banning
were great.
   Mandela’s speech is a moving testament of detention. In later years, Mandela
said that her own detention “changed her as a person.” But she spoke very little of
either her feelings or her private life. What she hints at in her talk is that the com¬
bination of solitary confinement and interrogation was a process that few could
resist without some experience of personal disintegration. It appears to have been
the stark choice of collaboration or the cause of liberation that kept Mandela
focused and sane.
                                                                       Sheila Meintjes




344   *   1960s and 1970s
Detention means that midnight knock when all about you is quiet. It
means those blinding torches shone simultaneously through every window
of your house before the door is kicked open. It means the exclusive right the
Security Branch have to read each and every letter in the house, no matter
how personal it might be. It means paging through each and every book on
your shelves, lifting carpets, looking under beds, lifting sleeping children
from mattresses and looking under the sheets. It means tasting your sugar,
your mealie-meal and every spice you have on your kitchen shelf. Unpacking
all your clothing on your shelves and in your suitcases, and going through
each pocket. It means you no longer have a right to answer your telephone
should a call come through, no right to speak to anyone who might come to
find out if you need help. It means interrogating your employer to find out
why you are employed, questioning fellow workers to find out what you dis¬
cuss privately, planting informers at work, around your neighbourhood,
amongst your friends, in church, in school, etc.
  Ultimately it means your seizure at dawn, dragged away from little chil¬
dren screaming and clinging to your skirt, imploring the white man drag¬
ging mummy to leave her alone. It means leaving the comfort of your home
with the bare essentials of life that hardly make life bearable in your cell.
It means the haunting memories of those screams of the loved ones, the
beginning of that horror story told many a time and that has become
common knowledge, yet the actual experience remains petrifying.
   To review but the minimum bare facts: it means, as it was for me, being
held in a single cell with the light burning twenty-four hours so that I lost
track of time and was unable to tell whether it was day or night. Every sin¬
gle moment of your life is strictly regulated and supervised. Complete iso¬
lation from the outside world, no privacy, no visitor, lawyer or minister. It
means no-one to talk to each 24 hours, no knowledge of how long you will
be imprisoned and why you are imprisoned, getting medical attention from
the doctor only when you are seriously ill. It means a visit from one magis¬
trate and a retinue of the prison officials against whom you may wish to
lodge a complaint and at whose mercy you are held. The very manner in
which you are asked for complaints in fact means “How dare you complain.”
  The frightful emptiness of those hours of solitude is unbearable. Your
company is your solitude, your blanket, your mat, your sanitary bucket, your
mug and yourself. You have no choice of what you are given to eat even
though you have not been charged. You have only one hour exercise per day
depending on whether there is enough staff to spare. To you, your very exis¬
tence in prison seems to be a privilege. All this is in preparation for the
inevitable HELL—interrogation. It is meant to crush your individuality
completely, to change you into a docile being from whom no resistance can
 arise, to terrorise you, to intimidate you into silence. After you have suffered
the first initial shock of imprisonment for those who are inexperienced, this
initial shock followed by the detainee’s adaptation to prison has an effect of
 changing the detainee s personality and outlook in life.


                              Detention Alone Is a Trial in Itself        ♦   345
      In some cases it means severe moods from fervent hope to deep despair.
Each day of nothingness is a struggle to survive. What sustains you is the
spontaneous defence mechanism, that granite desire to defend and protect
at all cost [against] disintegration of personality. You ask yourself questions
without answers day after day, week after week, month after month, and
then you keep telling yourself—I am sane and I will remain sane.
  You’re subjected to countless stripping of all your clothes. You must be
quite naked for the white prison wardress to search your body thoroughly,
to run fingers through your hair, to look in your mouth and under your
tongue. There have been alleged suicides in detention; you keep asking
yourself whether you will leave the cell alive for you do not know what
drove those who died to their deaths. Sometimes it is a serious effort to
remember what happened, the mind becomes completely blank. Then sud¬
denly when you have gone through all this you are whisked away from your
cell to the interrogation room.
      Here now you have to enter a debate within yourself. There are only two
divisions, you decide whether you will emerge a collaborator with the sys¬
tem or continue your identification with whatever your cause is. [. . .]




 MaMhlalise Mkhwanazi, The BASKING LIZARD
                          South Africa 1976       isiZulu


The izibongo (praise poems) of MaMhlalise Mkhwanazi are in a sense far more
modern than the “Ballad of Nomagundwane” sung by Princess Magogo (see the text,
recorded in 1964, in this volume). Yet the very confidence of the poems, their sure
handling of the rhetoric of praising and of recurrent praise names, which all com¬
posers can make use of and call their own, show that the line of aesthetic production
of dynamic and vigorous praise poems is a cultural skill to which women have had
access for many, many generations. I recorded these izibongo of MaMhlalise on 22
January 1976 at Mtshiva Gorge near KwaDlangezwa, which is not far from
Empangeni in northern KwaZulu-Natal. MaMhlalise, thpn well into middle age,
lived until 1998, and her passing was much mourned by her fellow women members
of Ibandla lamaNazaretha of the Wozawoza temple at KwaDlangezwa.
  The praise poem included here is a vehicle through which MaMhlalise speaks
to her own vigorous and strong personality and in which she sketches, in a highly
compressed and abstract way, some of the contours of her own life. She brings into
her izibongo a sense of married life, and before that, her careless youth. She plays
with words and wit, using a well-worn and still expressive praise name that puns
on her own family name. Her family name is MaMbambo (Miss Rib), and
Mkhwanazi is her married name, so she takes MaMbambo and hitches to it the
popular “I am Ribs-Pressed-Me-In / I would have been a well-built girl” and
makes it a mark of her youth in her brief life-poem. She plunders and reuses other
well-known praise names as^well, taking “The Mimosa Bush with thorns” (also a
praise name of Isaiah Shembe, to whose church she belonged) and expertly turn-


346    ♦   1960s AND 1970s
ing it to her own use as she cryptically captures some of the tensions of polyga¬
mous married life and the competition among wives. Her humor is earthy and
unabashed and her audience of women at the time of recording enjoyed her ren¬
dering of the praises. She hints at her role as senior wife—“The Beater of those
who use corrugated iron for doors”—and then again with great gusto turns her
attention to the sexuality not of her cowives but of a “Bull,” whose real identity her
praise poem does not reveal but whom her listeners would surely know. Boldly, she
mocks him for his infidelities, which absorb him so much that he is sexually “use¬
less at home”—and no good to any of his wives.
   MaMhlalise was a widow ol the late Chiel Nikiza Mkhwanazi and had, after
his death, become the wife of one of his brothers, Japhane Mkhwanazi.
                                                                          Liz Gunner


                                          ♦

   The Basking Lizard lying in wayward abandon at her sister’s,
      Nomchitheka’s.
   I am Ribs-Pressed-Me-In
   I would have been a well-built girl.
   (I am) Doves-that-woke-and-pecked at the roof.
   The High Greenish Grass tufts
   that will one day be jumped by the clever ones.
   The Mimosa Bush with thorns for keeping out
   those wretched vaginas of their mothers! [a burst of laughter from the
      women]
   I am Squish on something and they say, “She’s crapped!”
   But she hasn’t crapped, it’s her co-wife that’s crapped!
   The Beater of those who stand, legs apart, lazy and stiff-legged like
      cooking pots.
   I am The Beater of those who use corrugated iron for doors, [she pauses
       and continues]
    I am what kind of Bull is it
    that mounts outside its own kraal
    but is useless at home.
    Hah! What do you say to that you old Khandempemvu [grey-headed]
       fellow!

                                                         Transcribed by Liz Gunner
                                    Translated by Liz Gunner and Mafika Gwala




                                                     The Basking Lizard        ♦   347
        Joyce Sikhakhane, WORKING ON THE MAIL
                            South Africa 1977     English


Joyce Sikhakhane was one of the first black women journalists in South Africa, and
a political activist detained and finally charged under the notorious Terrorism Act.
Prevented from continuing her career as a journalist after her acquittal, she left the
country in 1973 to join the liberation movement in exile. In 1977, through the
International Defence and Aid Fund in London, she published A Window on
Soweto, skillfully interweaving personal narrative (including family history) with
historical and sociological accounts.
      Sikhakhane was born in 1943 and brought up in the Orlando district of Soweto,
at that time a conglomerate of twenty-six locations covering thirty-two square
miles, where more and more black South Africans were being resettled after hav¬
ing been forced to leave Sophiatown. Her grandfather was one of the first African
ministers of the Lutheran church and an early African National Congress activist
who gave to his granddaughter the Zulu name Nomafa, meaning “inheritance”; in
later life she took this to signal her destiny as a political activist. She became a
journalist with the Rand Daily Mail in Johannesburg in 1966.
   A Window on Soweto is, among other things, an important account of the sys¬
temic dangers and insults faced by black professional women: the meager earnings,
high taxation, and minimal benefits (despite white newspapers’ dependence on
black journalists for stories to which white journalists had no access); the police
harassment; and the constant threat of imprisonment, torture, and death, as well as
of “repatriation” to areas deemed ethnic “homelands.”
   Arrested in 1969 at much the same time as Winnie Mandela, Rita Ndzanga,
Martha Dhlamini, Thokozile Mngoma, Nomwe Mamkhala, and Santhie Naidoo
under Section 10 of the Terrorism Act, Sikhakhane was detained without trial, and
kept often in solitary confinement, for seventeen months (see Mandela’s text in this
volume). Interrogated in Pretoria Central Prison, transferred for a time to Nylstroom
Prison (after she had refused to become a state witness), and returned once again and
released in September 1970, she was served with a banningWder that prohibited her
from all social and political gatherings and from entering newspaper offices, educa¬
tional institutions, and factories. After she left South Africa for Zambia, now with a
second child, her daughter Nomzamo, she married the Scots doctor referred to in the
excerpt; worked in Mozambique and Zimbabwe as a journalist, scriptwriter, and
researcher; obtained a degree in England; and returned to South Africa in 1994.
Until February 2001 she worked as an editor at the South African Broadcasting
Corporation. She is currently writing a historical narrative on Albertina Sisulu as
well as the authorized biography of Albertina and Walter Sisulu.
                                                                      Dorothy Driver


                                         ♦




348     ♦   1960s and 1970s
Nkosinathi was only three weeks old when I returned to work because I
had withdrawn all the meagre maternity allowance. My mother was still
working as a dressmaker and she agreed to look after my baby, thus
Nkosinathi was saved the agony of being shunted from house to house in
search of grannies. By 1966,1 earned more than RIO a week, thus liable to
the Pay-as-you-earn [PAYE] Tax Scheme and Maternity Benefit Fund. I
must point out that strictly speaking this form of taxation in South Africa
was specifically designed for the white privileged class whose wages are
never less than RIO a week. In addition to this tax, the Bantustan levy was
deducted from my salary. Only a fraction of the African professional or
skilled labourers earn money that qualifies them for the PAYE Scheme.
The majority of African women hardly earn R6 a week.
  After working for a few weeks back with the World, I walked out
because I could no longer tolerate reporting sensational crime stories. I
had, after all, gained typing experience and learnt how to present news.
  I walked to the Rand Daily Mail offices and asked if I could get a job as
a reporter. I remember the “Township” News Editor of the Mail saying to
me that the Mail had never employed a black woman before. I argued and
persuaded him. He gave in by saying I could give it a try as a freelancer.
The Mail had a big African readership. It was a liberal newspaper which
had recently published a series of stories exposing the horrifying condi¬
tions of South African prisons.
   I started as a freelance reporter but at the same time I was pressing to
be employed on a full-time basis, the reasons being, first, all African part-
time journalists were refused registration as full-time workers by the labour
office. This meant they were employed on a daily labourer’s permit, whose
fee was R1.50 a month and renewable at the end of each month. This
meant that each reporter had to make the usual nerve-racking call at the
pass office once a month. Secondly, working as a freelancer meant hard
work in order to earn a living wage. Payment was according to the number
of stories published by the newspapers you freelanced for. In order to keep
good reporters for itself, the Mail offered a basic retainer’s fee which was
not adequate by any standards and a part-timer lost should he not be pro¬
ductive enough. To overcome the labour registration hazard, I did not take
a discharge from the World, I now and again popped in there with sensa¬
tional crime stories.
   To the Mail I brought in the right type of stories—like the mass removal
of Africans from their own areas, because of the Group Areas Act. Stories of
political trials, of strikes by African workers and so on. By this time the Mail
needed African reporters because white journalists need special permits to
enter African areas. Although an African needed a permit to enter other
African areas it was invariably easier to sneak in if you were African. I enjoyed
the art of sneaking in and was able to get good stories for the Mail. This was
the time of the notorious “resettlement” areas—Limehill, Stinkwater, and
other removal areas. I remember in Limehill about live babies died in my


                                              Working on the Mail         ♦   349
arms—at different times—because of exposure or malnutrition, because their
parents had been forcibly dumped in the open veld without any food and
shelter. Together with Father Cosmas Desmond and others, we laid a tomb¬
stone in one such grave to commemorate such an agonising death.
      The tears of those bereaved mothers still haunt my mind today. After
making my name, the Rand Daily Mail had no choice but to think of
employing me on a lull-time basis. They were reluctant at first because the
whole South African Associated Newspapers Group (SAAN) had never
employed an African woman before. The Group had to consider what
salary to pay me. Not forgetting the toilet facilities in a country where peo¬
ple of different racial groups cannot even share a toilet. I remember that
one day I was so pressed I had to go to the loo. At this stage SAAN had
not yet allocated a toilet for me, so I went to the Ladies. While I was sit¬
ting there a group of angry white women came and pulled me out of the
seat. SAAN had no way of defending itself because the law required that
there should be separate toilets for each racial group. Subsequently I was
given a whole block of toilets on the ground floor. It was a bonanza!
      Another physical assault on me as a black person happened hundreds of
miles from Johannesburg. It was at a restaurant in Lichtenburg, in the
Northern Transvaal. I had been travelling in a car with a group of African
women who had been to a three-day annual meeting of the National
Council of African Women. I was at the conference for press coverage. As
we were driving on this hot Sunday afternoon, we all became thirsty and
decided to stop the car after spotting a restaurant.
   I then walked over to buy cold drinks for the whole group. On
approaching the restaurant, the outside of the door did not display the cus¬
tomary segregated entrance sign. I went in straight to the counter and
ordered five bottles of Coke and Fanta. There were no customers standing
at the counter at the time. From the face of the woman shop attendant I
read an expression of mute consternation. It puzzled me. Without saying a
word, the man in attendance with her picked up an empty bottle of coca-
cola and came out from the counter towards the huge freezer standing next
to me. I thought he was going to take out the drinks I had ordered. The
next thing I felt was a thud on my head. I fell on the ground and fainted.
I regained consciousness later, as cold water was being poured on me. I was
lying on the pavement. In my stupor, I could hear women’s voices saying
“She is alright now.” They picked me up and helped me to my feet head¬
ing to the car. I gradually recalled what had happened. I got very angry. In
the car the women explained to me that as they were sitting in the car, they
saw two men coming out of the restaurant carrying what looked like a
woman’s body by its legs and arms. The men dumped the body on the
pavement outside the shop and returned inside. Recognising the colour of
the body’s dress, they wejre sure it was me. In panic they all ran out of the
car to find out what had happened. A “deranged” white man came out of
the restaurant, shouting that no kaffr had ever entered his shop through


350    ♦   1960s and 1970s
the front door.” Local Africans, who had by now gathered around, had
pointed to a side window through which blacks purchased food from that
restaurant. But then we Jo’burg Africans were used to using the same doors
in certain City restaurants which do not display segregated entrance signs.
  I, in turn, related the attack to the group, and we decided to drive to the
local police station. As we approached it a car overtook us at full speed,
stopped, and a white man brandishing a gun got out and threatened to
shoot us if we drove to the police station.
  We decided that reporting to the police was not worth risking our lives.
I would instead report the assault in Johannesburg. That rascal’s car fol¬
lowed us a few miles out of Lichtenburg.
   We arrived in Johannesburg after midnight. We were all tired and I
decided I would discuss the attack first at the Mail before going to the police.
On the following day, the Mail News Editor advised me to go straight to
John Vorster Square and lay a charge of assault. He explained that should the
Mail publish the case, the police, government and its supporters would accuse
it of being sensational and harming race relations. The Mail would instead
give full coverage of the case once it was in court. The News Editor asked a
crime reporter to accompany me to John Vorster Square. In the SAAN car,
driven by an African, I sat in front, the other reporter at the back.
   On arrival at John Vorster Square the crime reporter and I used separate
entrances leading to the “Nie-Blankes”—“Non-WEite ’—charge office.
Inside a mid-high wall partition separated whites from blacks. So my col¬
league spoke to the man of his colour, while I told the African one that I
was accompanied by a colleague who was explaining my case at the other
side. The “colleague” reference puzzled the African police who asked if
“that white man” was not my boss.
   Then the policeman from the other side came and instructed the
African one to take my statement. He stood by as I described the attack.
Before I started my colleague asked to be excused. Calling each other s first
names we said bye bye to each other. It was all foreign to both policemen.
After dictating the details to the African police, the white one asked for
the name of the restaurant. I did not know it, but said I could point it out
on the spot. He then asked for the description of my attacker. I told him,
adding that it would not be difficult to identify him since at the time of
the attack there was only the woman and the man in the shop. The man
had also said he was the owner of the restaurant. I gave the names of my
witnesses. They were all respectable women, teachers and nurses. One of
them had actually grown up in Lichtenburg and was now wife of a lawyer.
She was also the national president of the National Council of African
Women. The white police took the statement and said I would be con¬
tacted when the investigation was finished.
   After a long lapse, I went back to John Vorster Square to inquire about
what had happened to the investigation. A few days after my inquiry I
received a note from the investigating officer stating that after a thorough


                                              Working on the Mail        ♦   351
investigation, it was decided there was not enough evidence to institute
prosecution. That was the end of the case. By this time the Mzzz/had no legal
power to publish the attack. It had been through the hands of the police.
      Being on the road collecting good stories which exposed the brutality of
the apartheid system had its dangers. One day, photographer Peter
Magubane and I were stopped by the Security Police as we were driving
around in Limehill. We were thoroughly searched on the spot. The police
demanded our press cards which we did not possess anyway. In South
Africa it is the police who issue press cards! We produced the passbooks
which they demanded. Peter’s fdm spool and my notebook were confiscated.
The police then led us out of Limehill and warned us we would be arrested
on return.
      Because the Mail was taking a long time in deciding on my job
prospects I staged a demonstration by walking out and taking a full-time
job with Post and Drum.
      I went back to the World to get a discharge. The white accountant
wanted to backdate the discharge to the day I walked out of the newspa¬
per. I defended myself by saying “But really I’ve been still working for you.”
It was true. For the two years of freelance work I did send crime stories for
the World publication. I got an updated discharge, thus escaping the ques¬
tion “What have you been doing in the past two years” from the labour
office. In South Africa’s white cities, Africans get “repatriated” to the
homelands if it is deemed they had been idling for a period.
      As I was now in great demand, I wanted to prove a point to the Mail that
as an intelligent black woman journalist I was a force to be reckoned with.
After only three months with Post and Drum, the Rand Daily Mail wrote a
letter offering me a permanent job. I went back. I rejoined the Mail because
the Post newspaper, which was a weekly, was not as outspoken as the Mail.
It also depended a lot on crime sensation stories and pin-up girls pictures.
During its heyday, Drum was popular for its coverage of feature stories
which involved political organisations. I had been unfortunate in that I had
entered the journalistic trade at a time when outstanding black and white
journalists were either in gaol or in exile, banned or underground.
   The publishing houses were being seriously threatened by tougher leg¬
islation of press censorship. The remnants of press freedom were in the
process of being further curtailed. Given the prevailing conditions I was
relieved to have been called back by the Mail. It was a good personal
achievement. If I remember correctly this happened towards the beginning
of 1968. My work on the Mail was however destined to be short-lived.
  Not long after I returned I experienced one of the happiest moments of
my life. I became secretly engaged to Kenneth Rankin, a Scottish doctor,
whom I had met during one of my “daring” assignments. Because our
respective complexions are similar to the advertisement for the Scotch
whisky Black and White we could not get engaged in public in that sorry
country. Ours was an illegal affair.


352     ♦   1960s AND 1970s
  Our courting was a risky business. I recall an attack on us as we were
driving down Jan Smuts Avenue one night. I had made the mistake of sit¬
ting in the front seat as Kenneth was driving. The car behind us suddenly
pulled next to ours on my side as we stopped at the red lights. We heard
voices screaming and we looked. There were six bully-like white fellows in
the other car, gesticulating with their fists and shouting at us, pointing at
me in particular. The lights changed, and Kenneth drove off at full speed.
The other car followed suit. It was a chase. Thrice it drove ahead of us and
tried to block us but Kenneth managed to steer clear. He made a mistake
leaving the motorway and turning into a smaller road. All the six men
jumped out of the car, one held a gun and was threatening to use it. We
had locked our doors. The men surrounded the car attempting to open the
doors. I braved it, and unlocked mine, the next moment I was dragged out
and shaken by the men as if they were loosening dust stuck in a blanket.
They hurled me back into the car, but in the back seat. All insults which
belong to the gutter were flung at me. I was warned by the men that “in
future I should know where my place is.” They got back into their car and
drove off. We followed at slow speed and made a detour at the first chance
we got. We did not drive to our planned destination, but Kenneth dropped
me off at a taxi rank instead.
  A few days later, Kenneth left the country, after we had planned that I
would follow him with Nkosinathi by whatever means. A few weeks later
I was, instead, an inmate of a solitary confinement cell held under the
South African Terrorism Act. Suddenly my life was in complete ruins, with
the shadow of death lurking in the surrounds of Pretoria Central Prison.




                                            Working on the Mail       ♦   353
    A




*
1980s
■S
     *'V




      A
  Lauretta Ngcobo, THE RENDING OF THE VEIL
                          South Africa 1981       English


Lauretta Ngcobo (nee Gwina) was born in South Africa in 1931, of Zulu and
Xhosa parents. She completed much of her school education at American Board
missionary institutions such as Inanda Seminary, and gained a B.A. degree and
teaching qualification at the University of Fort Hare in the Eastern Cape. After
teaching in various South African schools, she married A. B. Ngcobo, who was
active in the Pan African Congress. She went into exile in 1963 to escape arrest by
the South African security police, living in Swaziland and Zimbabwe before mov¬
ing to Britain in 1969 where she remained until her return to South Africa in
1993. She remains active in politics in KwaZulu-Natal.
   Ngcobo is the author of two novels, Cross of Gold (1981)—from which the
excerpt below is taken—and And They Didn’t Die (1990). She is also the editor of
an anthology entitled Let It Be Told: Black Women Writers in Britain (1987). Her
short prose pieces have been included in various anthologies, and she has written
introductions to other southern African women writers’ work. She is the mother
of three daughters.
    Cross of Gold (1981) appeared during a period of literary production marked by
the influence of Black Consciousness, and forms part of the genre of “protest fic¬
tion.” “For many years it lay in a drawer, until I met a person . . . who wanted to
read it,” Ngcobo said in an interview. Written in the 1970s and published outside
South Africa, it was one of the first novels in English by a black South African
woman. While the novel refers to the mining revolt of 1946 and the impact of the
Sharpeville massacre of 1960, it may also be read as a response to the Soweto stu¬
dent uprisings of 1976. As such the novel attempts to address and inscribe black
responses to the oppressive South African system of institutionalized racism.
   The excerpt from Chapter One focuses on Sindisiwe Zikode’s flight into exile
across the South Africa-Botswana border; the chapter ends in her death from a
wound received from the South African border patrol officers. She dies under the
gaze of her sons, whose story the novel then tells. Ngcobo noted in a 1989 inter¬
view that, while she tried to write a woman’s story, she was unable to imagine the
woman surviving beyond the initial pages.
  In diagnosing the position of women in post-apartheid South Africa, Ngcobo
has argued that “Black women should soon grow confident and find room enough
to speak for themselves, so that others will no longer find it possible or necessary
to speak on their behalf.” She has responded to her own injunction in her second
novel, And They Didn’t Die, where she brings the full focus of her art as a writer to
bear on the experiences of rural South African women.
                                                                          A. C. Fick


                                         ♦




                                             The Rending of the Veil         ♦   357
Sindisiwe Zikode lay behind the huge boulder in the silence of the night
among the straggly bushes of the barren land. She listened and strained for
any sound that would make her feel she had some company; that she was
not so utterly alone; but all she could hear was the loud thud of her heart—
a heart that reminded her of all her fears, her grievances, the treacherous
hopes and the clotted emotions that fdled it. In that darkness without
breeze or insects or crickets that cheer the night with their hum and song
in South Africa, she prayed for one thing only, and she told God that it
was the last great request she would ever make to him. She gave promises
and turned that sheltering rock into an altar for her penitence. She thought
of the past and the future in wide sweeping circles that whirled in her mind
till they were spirals that lifted her in supplication to God.
    But this great prayer, unlike all her former prayers before her doubts had
arisen about God, kept running aground upon her sorrow and wishes. She
was waiting there for her sons, Mandla and Temba. They were just beyond
the border, a few hours away from her. Those few strands of barbed wire
fence stood between her and her children, her home, her husband and her
country. Her thoughts about all these dear things raced and chased each
other in a circle that came to no end. If only she could be stronger to bear
the disappointment, if it came. Would they come that night? Would they
be safe? Could they cross silently, undetected, alone, without being accom¬
panied? Would they be able to spot the exact place of “the big boulder,”
would the driver see the boulder at night, would the guards go away to
their sleep after midnight? Of late they were more alert than usual, they
took turns to guard the fence—but the fence was long. God’s hand would
guide the Boer police away from her children.
  Sindisiwe had suffered much in the past few months, and told herself
she could still suffer more if called upon to do so. But again, almost shame¬
fully, she admitted to herself that the courage and defiance that her polit¬
ical training had given her were wearing thin; how else could she account
for her frequent relapses into prayer in those last few months? In that
formless mute darkness she tried again to merge hex belief in God and her
belief in herself. She drilled her conscience again into believing that vio¬
lence is morally better than passive submission; and that acquiescence is
evil. She told herself over and over again that it was right that her children
should join her in this monastery of her refuge and learn all its disciplines.
  The hours crawled by, and her thoughts outpaced the hours. This no
longer frustrated her. It was one discipline she had acquired in this lonely
exile, where she feared to confide even in those nearest to her. She could
now contain most of her restless thoughts. But tonight her thoughts were
sterile, they gave her no emotional stability. She was restless, with clammy
hands and a head that swirled. They were woolly thoughts that turned and
lashed like a multitude o£ snakes.
  At first, soon after midnight, she thought it was the extension of her
cowardly heart that fluttered and thudded, so that the whole place filled


358   ♦   1980s
with a soft hum. Another moment told her it was the car. It must be the
car, the car that was bringing her children. Almost beside herself she
moved and stood up to peer through the dark. She tried to listen if there
was anyone else around, but the sound ol her heart, even more than that of
the car, drowned any other sound. She heard the car stop at a distance. She
at last had come to the endless end. She knew he had stopped a long way
away, but she admitted to herself that the driver could not drive any fur¬
ther without risking being found out. She debated whether to go over the
fence and meet them or to wait. Her eyes, accustomed to the darkness,
could see the little ribbon of a footpath that local people used without fear
of consequence during the day. She would not follow that path. It was a
day path for guiltless people whose lives harboured no conspiracies. Her
whole body was flushed in a flood of warm mother-love that she had
denied herself for so long. The very thought that her two children were a
matter of yards from her stirred her into hot tears.
  She sniffed and crouched under the fence and crossed to meet them.
She could not let them face the danger of that border alone; besides, some¬
thing seemed to have taken complete possession of all her physical body;
she could not hold back her feet, even if she had tried. Soon the formless
darkness shaped itself into a moving shape. She could not hear any sounds,
not even of her own fleeting steps. A few whispers of gratitude and the
man turned on his way back, happy in the knowledge that one more “mis¬
sion” had been accomplished.
   Sindisiwe gathered her sons into the warmth of her arms and love in that
speechless darkness. She felt their rigid bodies melt in fearlessness. She
smeared them with the tears of her joy but the children were dry in their
bewilderment. The last few days had tossed them through strange situations,
alone, without the certainty of life as they had known it with their grand¬
parents. Avoiding the path again, she softly tripped through the grass. . . .
   Then, right there before them, next to the fence rose a form. She whis¬
pered dryly “Cushani! (crawl through!)” and her sons scattered to cross like
lonesome sheep. The boys were accustomed to fast movements across fences
in the freedom of their life in the country, but Sindisiwe was not; she car¬
ried their suitcase, she knew the danger and her knees wobbled when she
heard the first shot. The darkness screamed with the sound of the gun; she
heard another one and thought she felt something on her thigh, but she
told herself it was the wire that had scratched her. Once on the other side
of the fence she felt the heaviness of her leg and could no longer doubt that
she had been wounded. “Yet I can walk; maybe I’m not wounded.”
   Her concern in any case was not for her leg but for her children. She knew
they must have crossed and, because they were faster, must be ahead of her.
A quarter of a mile down, with the suitcase on her head, she felt the hot pain
and some faintness. She decided to sit down and call her sons. Mandla was
near but they could not find Temba; he had run even further. Sindisiwe, not
wishing to alarm her son did not disclose her injury, but told him to go and


                                         The Rending of the Veil       *   359
look for Temba. Naturally, Mandla was reluctant, but his mother assured
him that they were safe where they were; they were in Botswana and noth¬
ing could harm them any more. More out of concern for his beloved brother
than from lack of fear, Mandla went on stepping silently.
  He dared not shout, but Temba, who was straining for any sounds of his
mother and brother, gave a slight cough. Sindisiwe persuaded her children
to spend the night with her outside on that cold autumn dark night.
Unseen, she tied a stocking on the wound that was bleeding freely and
would make her very weak. “It can’t be a serious injury or how can I walk?”
They sat there, unable to sleep for they were cold and heavy with the mis¬
fortunes of the dark night. And for Sindisiwe there was the added burden
of a hidden, unknown injury. The weight of it, the fear of its possibilities,
lay there and stiffened her thoughts. “It is best to reveal wounds in the
light of day—daylight takes away their mystery.”
  Just before the darkness broke, she heard the rhythmic breathing of her
sons—they were asleep at last; they were tired. She got another chance to
relax her steeled nerves, she melted into another hot flood of tears. But soon
she told herself she had to be strong; for their sake she could not afford the
luxury of self-pity. She had to bear even the pain with a serene face. She
began to worry whether her leg would allow her to walk the next ten miles
back to Gaborone. She was apprehensive, and again she turned to God.
This time she almost laughed at the game she played with her God. He no
longer seemed God the creator, but the God that she had created herself for
her manifold needs. A few hours earlier she had entreated him for her last
request, but now she had yet another; her trust in his infinite goodness
waxed stronger. She prayed now, not for one specific request, but simply laid
her life at his feet for his use in his infinite wisdom. She did not know what
to pray for because she truly did not know what to do, though she knew she
desperately needed some assistance. Who would take an injured woman
with children? Up to now she had shared one hut with six other women,
four of them with babies and three of them with husbands who lived and
slept in another hut two miles away; refugees like^her. She had saved her
last bit of money in the hope that when her children came she could per¬
suade one of the other villagers around to accept the money in exchange for
the use of one of their huts. But she had put off finding the hut until her
children came. How could she have told people that she was expecting her
children, even before they came? People’s movements had become such very
personal matters. Whom could she have trusted with such a secret? The
South African spies were everywhere; nobody was close enough to be
trusted. And now she was wounded—how would she explain her injury to
the villagers, any villagers? Besides, they had all been warned against South
Africans “who crossed the borders to cause trouble in their own land.”
  When the boys woke^up they realised with horror their mother’s help¬
lessness. They were perplexed—it all seemed a nightmare. She sent them for
their breakfast supplies from a little store further down along the border.


360   ♦   1980s
They moved in fear, whispering to each other all the way, even though the
brilliant sun shone on the dry land that opened its arms in welcome. They
could not reconcile the violence of the night with the peace of day. As the
sun rose in that treeless stretch they saw the pain in their mother’s eyes and
the helplessness she could not hide. She could not walk, for the whole leg
was swollen as it lay on the dry clotted blood. Mandla thought of medical
supplies, but the inside of the store had shown him it could offer nothing
in that line. Finally he asked hesitatingly where they could find a hospital
or clinic. There wasn’t one for ten miles.
  Towards sunset Sindisiwe was beginning to feel very feverish and she
began to fear that the simple wound could turn septic. So she sent her sons
to look for assistance. She dared ask for assistance, though she knew all the
people around feared for their own safety. The villages were not very far
away, but the boys received no more than a cold stare as they tried to explain
their trouble. They encountered a new unexpected problem. These people
spoke Tswana and because they had spent most of their time in Natal, they
spoke only Zulu. Beyond the language gulf they saw fear in the cold stares.
   After passing through several huts, when the sun was red on the distant
mountains, the boys came at last to the home of one woman who broke into
a flood of Zulu. In spite of their sorrow they smiled and explained their
plight. The language barrier had been breached, and by the time they broke
the tragic news of their mother, the woman could no longer recoil com¬
pletely. She was a Motswana who had lived in Johannesburg for some years
and had learned not only Zulu but suffering, and fearlessness of strangers.
Her name was Makeletso and she had kept the secret of a husband on
Robben Island very successfully. So she told the boys of the dangers sur¬
rounding their request; though a political activist herself, she wished to shy
away from any further involvement now that she was back home. The
neighbours would know she was harbouring a wounded strange woman and
sons; obviously these would be South African trouble-makers. The news
would reach the chief before the following sunset and from there who knew
what might happen. Indeed, nobody knew what could happen; but if the
Botswana Government did not act, then the South Africans at the border
in their own right would be very unkind to the villagers who wanted to
cross over to the other side. There were bigger shops across the border and
besides, many of their own friends and relatives lived just across the border.
These borders were Whitemen’s borders. They cut through tribes and
divided villages and relatives. She would bring sorrow to the whole village.
   Nevertheless Makeletso consented to return with the boys when it was
dark, with food, hot porridge and some medicines. She had learned to live
here in this “wilderness” as she called it, with some supplies of her own, her
Dettol, bandages, ointment and aspirins. The boys were tired, but this gave
them hope. They began to hope again, as though she had promised them
her whole life. After all what do boys of twelve and fourteen, who have
grown up in the country, know about the complications of bullet wounds?


                                          The Rending of the Veil      ♦   361
To them it was the wound; they had hardly given a thought to the bullet
that nestled deep in the muscle, close to the bone.
   With the hot porridge warming their blood, they walked back with
Makeletso through darkness, stealthily, to the spot where their mother lay
groaning. She could no longer hide her agony. She was cold and very fever¬
ish. Sindisiwe felt her spirits rise, just to know somebody cared enough to
risk her own safety. But it was only her spirits. The treatment left her pain
unchanged. Makeletso had to rush back before anybody found out about her
absence, but she carried a heavy heart, for she knew the gravity of Sindisiwe’s
condition, and she was powerless to help. But how could she leave a woman
to die in the cold autumn night, with no one but her young sons to tend her?
“Tomorrow, tomorrow I’ll work it out. I’ll go there, and pretend I found her
by accident.” She worked it all out through the long sleepless hours.
   The next morning, it was clear to Sindisiwe that she could not live. She
thought about her children and wondered why they had to come, only to
see her die. What punishment was this; what for; and which God visited
parents’ punishment on children—had she really sinned to suffer this? She
did not fear death as such; she had toyed so often with the idea of dying
that she had often pictured herself actually welcoming death. But she had
thought of only one kind of death—dying while resisting the tyranny of
oppression of her people; certainly not so defencelessly while running away
from the Boers who had made her whole life, and those of others, such a
misery. She had dreamt of heroic death, not this.
   Her wandering gaze stared unseeingly at the vast burial ground of her
hopes, the freezing snowland of her strongest desires. Then her mind switched
to her two sons who sat abjectly on either side of her, shielding her from the
hot sun with an improvised shade of a shirt on a stick. She thought too of
Sipho, her husband. She had made the good habit of thinking as rarely of him
as she could possibly afford; it was an exercise that had taken her many
unbearably long months to master. How does one outgrow the habit of living
with a loving husband, from whom one has been separated by a long prison
sentence? She had ached and ached and ached for hirp and had fumbled a lot
at first, learning many new things in his absence in the belief that he would
have wanted her to take the stand she had taken. Once more she regretted that
they had never shared, and now would never share, this new life she had
learned in his absence; it had been basically for him she had done it all. She
had taught the heart that yearned after him day and night, and every minute
of her waking life, to drown its desires in hard work, work and more work.
Perhaps he would never know her devoted contribution to the cause that he
loved so well. And would he know she was dead? Those prison walls—did
anything ever penetrate them? Could news of her death cross borders and
waters to the fortress of Robben Island? With a deep sigh she whispered audi¬
bly* “Ngangiyoze ngiyizekel jdf I were to live, I would tell a long strange story!)”
  This gave Mandla the courage to ask what it was that had brought her
there where she had called for them so insistently and pathetically that


362   ♦   1980s
their grandfather had had to release them so reluctantly to face the haz¬
ardous trip on their own with only strangers for companions. She was
sweating profusely from the fever, not from the sun, and in spite of her
heavy breathing she answered, “I cannot now tell you the long story, but I
have some of my life stored away for you in my case. It is a strange story,
my child. But from here, when all is over, you will go to Sharpeville,
Number 20, Tema Street, where you will find a good friend of mine. She
is the one who sent the message to you people about my escape to this
place. She is Mrs Zethu Zungu. She knows the whole story. 1 left all my
things with her, my clothes, your lather’s clothes and some of my furniture.
She will tell you everything—”
   Sindisiwe looked down at her leg, lying there, so impotent and so vibrant
with pain. She lapsed into silence. Thinking about her sons—their present
and their future—was futile; besides, it was unbearable. Instead, she fell into
a reverie, slipping back into her past. Her childhood, so free of pain and
threats; in those early years she had never known what a cloud hung over all
life; she had not even known what was lacking in her life, until that unfor¬
gettable day. After that time, that day, no one could hide it from her: the pain
of separation, the lack of love and the need for money. A memory rose before
her eyes, a memory as alive as the land in front ol her. She saw her father in
her mind’s eye, hobbling before her, and knew that if she were to live through
this, she too would hobble for the rest of her days. She admitted to herself, in
the throes of her pain, that such an end was inevitable—she was her father’s
daughter. Somehow there was a connection between that distant year and the
present; something had inexorably drawn her to this fate, even without her
knowledge. She had spent so little time with her father before “that year,” that
even now, she could not remember how he had looked before the instant grey
hair of that year; before he came back from the mines to live out his days on
the Reserve with them; before he had that hobble in his walk.




                              Miriam Tlali,
              The Haunting Melancholy
                   of Klipvoordam
                          South Africa 1981      English


In 1980 “The Haunting Melancholy of Klipvoordam” was awarded third place in
a short story competition run by Drum magazine. Although Drums November
issue declared that the story would appear the following month, this was not to be.
It was instead published in the literary magazine Staffrider in 1981, and later
incorporated into Miriam Tlali’s collected stories and essays, Mihloti (1984).
   Tlali’s association with Staffrider started with its first issue in March 1978,
which contained her story “Soweto Hijack.” The first issue was banned: Staffrider



                     The Haunting Melancholy of Klipvoordam                 *    363
had introduced itself as “a skelm [rascal] of sorts” willing to confront the apartheid
censorship board. Tlali later became a regular contributor, publishing several short
stories and acting as an interviewer for the “Soweto Speaking” column. She had
previously made history as the first black woman inside South Africa to publish a
novel written in English. Muriel at Metropolitan, published in 1975, was banned in
the same year, as was her second novel, Amandla (1980). Tlali was to cross swords
again with the censorship board, and she developed ways to circumvent it. When,
for example, her story “Just the Two of Us” was banned (she had only read it at a
conference in Ohio), she published it as “Devil at a Dead End” in her volume
Footprints in the Quag (1989). (This volume appeared in the same year in the
United States under the title Soweto Stories.)
   “The Haunting Melancholy of Klipvoordam” is unusual for Staffrider because it
places the racist prescription of apartheid as subtext. Like other Black Consciousness
writing, however, Tlali’s story presents the reader with black humanity despite the
oppression of apartheid. Whereas Black Consciousness writing in the main concen¬
trates on black male characters, Tlali’s writing here and elsewhere decenters the
male. Moreover, the characters in this story are not defined solely by apartheid: Her
writing motions toward a vivid world that unsettles expectations and defies pigeon¬
holing, not least through the way two families—interacting in a contradictory
space—discover possibilities of leisure not previously considered. In her creative
texts as well as her essays and interviews, Tlali refuses to provide the hard and fast
answers often produced by Black Consciousness writing.
                                                                  Pumla Dineo Gqola


                                         ♦


It will take me a long long time to forget that New Year’s eve—the last day
of the year 1979. On that morning, we left Soweto bound for what was to
all of us a unique experience. By “us” I mean Donald, his wife Pauline, their
two nieces (Mpho and Mmaphuthi), my daughter Moleboheng and myself.
We were a happy lot, all the six of us, packed and cramped into the
Volkswagen Combi with provisions, blankets, mats, tents, umbrellas etc., the
typical camping equipment the devoted couple had accumulated over the
years. Peeping into the vehicle, I gasped with astonishment at the sight of all
the paraphernalia when our hostess opened the door to us. She had earlier
in the week invited us saying: “Come. You’ll be our guests.” And, needless to
say, their hospitality throughout was something one can only marvel at.
   I take the liberty of calling them “Don” and “Paul”—the way they so
fondly refer to each other. The like of them in a place like Soweto should
be protected from extinction; they should be honoured and revered. They
are like a rare and endangered species of God’s creation. They are among
the few who still strive to bring about order where there is only chaos and
despair. In the jumbled shattered existence of the Soweto Ghetto, they
hanker after the sustaining force of mother nature. For does nature’s eter¬
nal seasonal cycle not offer the propagation of new life in place of the
withering and dying and hence hope for the future?



364   ♦   1980s
It was early in the morning, and the cheerful crowds of people determined
to make the most of the holidays were not yet roaming the streets when we
left. There was little traffic all along the Soweto Highway right up to
Booysens where we joined the Ml Pretoria Highway. Soon, we were tra¬
versing the tree-lined affluent “white” northern suburbs of Johannesburg.
The scantily-populated vast countryside on the way towards Pretoria dis¬
trict looked green and peaceful. We detoured into the Hammanskraal main
road and followed the signs pointing to the small “dorpie” of Brits where
we stopped to refuel and buy refreshments. Then we set out eagerly on the
road again.
  One would have expected that we would arrive at some border post, some
line; a river or a bridge, at the end of which would be stationed a pair of
stern-looking uniformed guards. That these honourable gentlemen would be
wearing labelled epaulettes over their proud shoulders, or even medals on
their lapels. I had looked around expecting to see sign-posts along the road
reading: “Welcome To The Sovereign State of Bophuthatswana.”
  Yet we knew that by leaving Brits behind and taking a turn away from
the smoothly-tarred road, onto the gravel one, we had in fact departed
from the so-called “white” South Africa. We had left behind all the com¬
fort that goes with that part of this land. We were now part of the so-called
Bophuthatswana self-governing black state, having automatically relin¬
quished all that was of merit. The whole transition had been as easy as tak¬
ing candy from a child. Just like that. No lines of demarcation had been
drawn, no signs, nothing.
   It would have been redundant. We knew it; our bodies felt it. We were all
aware that the one world had come to an end and a new one had begun. The
dry dust, the thorny scrub on either side of the uneven road had warned us.
Our driver—“Ntate Dono” as little thumb-sucking Mpho called him—had
to dodge and meander around heaps and heaps of sand. It lay all over as if it
had been transported in truckloads straight from the Sahara Desert. And no
one had bothered to scrape it off. The Volkswagen bumped and joggled; it
twisted this way and that, all the way kept under control by the driver’s able
dexterity. I wiped the sweat from my brow with a piece of tissue paper. It was
a sweltering hot day. In fact, it was later reported to have been the hottest
day that summer. Looking around at my co-travellers, I wondered whether
their clammy foreheads were due to the weather or to the taxing drive.
   I decided to stop reflecting on the rather sudden transformation; to
indulge in no thoughts of the past or the future, but rather to try to enjoy
what the present brought before me, and be thankful for it. We all sighed
with relief when we realised that we were nearing the end of the hazardous
journey. Our combi entered the bushy settlement and went on for a short
while along the dusty road. Further on, there was a sharp bend where we
came to an abrupt halt. The few scattered brick and corrugated iron structures
were the offices of the holiday resort. Mpho, Mmaphuthi and Moleboheng
(who had cuddled together right at the rear of the vehicle) jumped happily


                    The Haunting Melancholy of Klipvoordam             ♦   365
out, enjoying the cool shadows of the trees. They scampered around the place
laughing and frolicking in anticipation. The beautiful unfamiliar trees nearby
attracted our attention. Their patulous yellow flowers broadened out in full
bloom and sparkled in the piercing sunshine. The kind smiling officials at the
offices welcomed us happily. One of them came over to us and greeted us
while “Ntate Dono” went on to the “stately” building to announce the arrival
of our party and receive formal permission to enter and camp there. Paul and
I decided to go for a short exploratory walk in the vicinity. It was the first time
I had the honour of visiting a “black” recreational area in a so-called inde¬
pendent state in my own country and naturally I was curious. The official who
accompanied us during our brief walk was willing to answer the numerous
questions we asked, but he frankly admitted that he could not enlighten us on
many of them. What were the names of the lovely trees with the yellow flow¬
ers dotted all around? Could we grow them in Soweto? Were there many dif¬
ferent kinds of wild birds and animals, and what varieties were there? And the
fish . . . would we be fortunate enough to catch many of them? The whole
prospect of what lay ahead for us on the eve of the new year seemed fascinat¬
ing and exciting. There was ever so much to learn. He informed us that we
were amongst the few earliest holiday makers who had come, and the choice
of where we would pitch our tent and settle down for the duration of our stay
would be all ours. There were also rooms to hire for those who did not have
their own camping equipment and many were still vacant, our guide said, but
these were nearer the offices and far from the beautiful dam.
  And what about all the rolls of steel wires, the poles and the enormous
heavy concrete cylinders lying around . . . What was about to be con¬
structed, I asked expectantly. “Nothing,” the man explained, “there’s no
money. The Bophuthatswana authorities must still get the money to
develop the new improvement projects. So much was still to be achieved.
The place is there waiting. The land with all its potential resources. But
there is no money. The whites were going to develop this place into a really
fine holiday resort, but they stopped when Bophuthatswana was handed
over to the blacks. They left everything as it wp.s and took away the
money!” “And what about the big imposing iron casements standing
upright with the thick wiring?” we asked, and he replied: “Those were to
be parts of a huge plant; an electricity generating machine which was to
supply power to the entire concourse but that too has come to an untimely
stop.” No money. The poor skeletal left-overs. We looked at them, quietly
reflecting. It dampened our spirits. The whole business of the poverty—the
ever-present legacy always so readily bequeathed to the “honourable”
inheritors of the so-called free black states. Who bothers about freedom in
a deprived desert anyway, I wondered. I was happy to say goodbye to the
kind guide with the parched lips and the worn uniform. And I wondered
just how far “our” contribution of fifty cents for our stay there would go
towards “improving the quality of life” in Klipvoordam Holiday Resort.



366   ♦   1980s
Little eight-year-old Mpho and her “Ntate Dono” immediately started to
work. She momentarily abandoned her favourite pastime of thumb-sucking
and demonstrated to all of us her expert knowledge of the camping and
angling “trade.” She had accompanied Ntate Dono on many previous occa¬
sions ever since she was a mere lour-year-old. After the two had chosen
what they considered to be the best spot to plant the three pairs of steel
pegs to support the fishing rods in position, Mmaphuthi and Moleboheng
joined them in digging, in anchoring posts and pitching the rectangular
tent. Everything seemed perfect. We would all cast glances now and again
at the vertically-suspended red and white spherical plastic balls (which
Mpho and Don referred to as the “policemen”) and which would show any
slight movement, suggesting the presence of a “catch” at the immersed end
of the line. I assisted Paul with the preparation of our lunch and the kids
stripped and garbed themselves in the swim-suits they had brought along
with them. Moleboheng, being of the same height and stature as Mmaph¬
uthi, easily fitted into the extra pair the latter had had the presence of mind
to provide. They wasted no time in plunging into the cool beckoning waters
and we could hear their deafening hilarious cries as they swam and threw
sandballs into the air. I envied them. I had never possessed a swim-suit. All
my life I had yearned to go for a holiday at the coast; anywhere away from
the hustle and bustle of the city, but I could never afford it. How many of us
are so fortunate in Soweto anyway? It struck me that it would be quite pre¬
posterous and shocking for me to do what I learnt was the common alterna¬
tive to having no swim-suit to wear—like the majority of those of my fellow
Sowetans and other blacks who managed to find themselves at the
Klipvoordam—to strip to the underwear and just have a good swim anyway!
Finally, tired of “ho lebella ngoale ha e khiba” (of watching the initiation girl
do her dance) as we say in our vernacular, Paul and I decided to indulge in
the more “acceptable” alternative we could manage—that of sitting on the
edge of the dam and only immersing our legs and thighs into the inviting
cool water—shame.

The tall trees behind us were throwing their shadows further and further
into the middle of the dam. We watched the images as they grew longer
and longer, bringing with them the mind-refreshing air of late afternoon.
  About the possibility of catching any fish, our angling expert had not
been optimistic. Paul had earlier intimated to me: “You know, Don said to
me last night at home that because there was a full moon, for some reason
or other, the fishes would not be easy to catch. That made me feel disap¬
pointed because I would have liked you to enjoy with us the excitement of
pulling out a fish from the water.” Don had been right after all. So far, ever
since our arrival before lunch-time, the “policemen” had only quavered
slightly, indicating that the fish had merely got near the bait to gnaw at
them and then withdraw to their “hiding places.” It struck me that these
aquatic creatures must be very very intelligent indeed, after all. The slowly


                    The Haunting Melancholy of Klipvoordam               ♦   367
rising full moon was rosy and majestic. I wondered why the fish would
want to shy away from it at all. For hours since we first sat there, not one
of them had even leapt over the surface of the water, whose gentle waves
the moon kept touching slightly with her crimson glow.
   The arrival of one more group of holiday-makers in a convoy of one big
American car and a packed panel van, made me believe what Paul had said
soon after we had settled down near the “deserted” resort. She had
observed: “It’s so quiet and lonely now; but by midday tomorrow—New
Year’s Day—this place will be so congested that there’ll not even be
enough space to move.” I had not taken her seriously then because to me
the likelihood of such an occurrence seemed quite remote. We watched
them from time to time as they pitched tent a good distance away from us,
and observed that their huge vanload consisted of many cases of beer, wine,
and all types of intoxicating spirits. To them, the arrival of the expected
multitudes would mean a good share of their holiday pay. In the scorching
heat of the Klipvoordam, with its vegetation of spiky-leafed scattered trees
with hardly any shade at all, the visitors would drink more and more to try
and quench their thirsts. It would be business and more business!
  Two more flickering lights on the far-off bank diagonally opposite to
where we were announced the arrival of two more camping companions.
  We had left Soweto behind. There were no loud sounds of exhilaration
and shouting. No cheap screechy turn-tables incessantly and noisily blar¬
ing away the latest Bob Marley or Jimmy Cliff reggae hits to echo and
accommodate the eager throbbing souls of Soweto’s jolling, body-wiggling
young and old. Here was peace and quiet; something we had come a long
way to enjoy. There were only the sounds of the birds and the mysterious
low moaning and subdued grunting and snarling of what our expert angler
said were the wild animals in the vicinity. Don, being the devout natural¬
ist he is, was the only one who could distinguish the various calls of the
wild. Had it not been for our complete reliance on his very excellent
knowledge of the behaviour of the beasts and the fluttering yellow flames
of our neighbours’ lamps, the somewhat disturbing jow cries in our imme¬
diate proximity would have driven me crazy with fright. It required real
courage on my part to ignore the recurring wailings.


I had remembered to bring my tape-recorder with me. The soothing, reas¬
suring voice of Brook Benton—one of our favourite Gospel and Ballad
singers—seemed to me to be the best way of easing my nerves. I turned the
volume knob on more to drown the sounds emerging from the dark forest
all around . . .


              If you think God is dead fust look around.
              I look at the $ea and realise no man can drain it.
              We’ve all got to die one day but no one can time it.




368   ♦   1980s
          Who else could make the moon and the sun shine over every
             city and every town f
         If you think God is dead', then you haven’t looked around . . .


As if aware of our peculiar setting and environment, the singer’s solemn
hushed tone insisted, inspiring us and providing a firm background to our
feelings. We chatted on softly, listening, assimilating and enjoying the free
endowments of nature. The cool breeze fanning the waves; the moon, the
stars, the stillness. And all the time, the music . . .


                       Look at the sea
                        Look at the trees
                        I guess you can hear the breeze
                        Look at each other.


                        So you see, God is not dead
                        If you don’t want to see Him,
                        You wont see Him
                        But if you want to see Him,
                        You look around. . .


We spoke of death. Each one of us remembered our dear departed ones. I
thought of my mother’s passing, and the hollow emptiness, the loneliness
I experienced at the time, came back vividly and I held back the tears
which came flooding into my eyes.
   We spoke of happiness ... of Zimbabwe and the prospect of the end to
long-raging war and the imminent “uhuru” for that country so close to “ours.”
“Just think what it will mean!” we kept remarking. To the Zimbabweans it
was certain that the new year would bring freedom, peace and prosperity for
all. It would bring hope. Was there any hope for us, we wondered.
   We looked around. There was a narrow winding path leading from the
hedges at the back of us to the edge of the dam. Pieces of rock were lined at
regular intervals along the edge of the water. The fast-approaching midnight
brought with it isolated human calls of “Happy! Happy!” from somewhere
behind the trees. They seemed to come from far away. An eerie, sombre
undertone lurked and echoed after every cry. It was evident that enthusiastic
late night arrivals had shown up and they had hired rooms in the resort. Dark
figures kept emerging from the bushes one by one, walking slowly along the
worn footpath. On reaching the end of the road near the rocks, each figure
would straddle over a rock or just stand there and look into the dark far-off
end of the still water and the distant horizon. Without saying a word, the
lone viewer would saunter slowly back into the spiky grove. This rather strik¬
ing behaviour of these holiday-makers did not disturb nor surprise us. Except
for the progressively-waning lonesome screams of Happy! Happy! the soli¬
tude was complete. There is something haunting and mysterious about the


                     The Haunting Melancholy of Klipvoordam                ♦   369
sight of wide expanses of the moving waters, the gentle ebb and flow of the
waves, which never fails to make the mind wander away into deep thought
and marvel at the miracle of creation.
      We talked about the approaching midnight and the end of the year,
every year, and the birth of another one in “our” Soweto. How different it
was then. There was, we knew, all the euphoria and exaltation; the singing,
ululating and dancing; the beating of drums and chiming of bells; the
crackling and bursting of crackers and explosives. And, as the bustling
finally wears       itself out, the great excursion would begin in earnest.
Busloads, truckloads, hooting cars adorned with colourful ribbons, carry¬
ing hundreds of eager men and women (mostly teenagers) dancing to the
rhythm of thunderous portable radios, stereos and tape-recorders. These
would be speeding through the grey townships to anywhere—all corners,
nooks and crevices; to any “available,” “permitted” or “open” picnic spots—
where blacks may be “allowed” to relax for the day. These would be some¬
where well out of the way of the “whites only” reserved luxury spots of
course: something like “our” Klipvoordam . . . out of their line of vision.
   Minutes before the decisive hour struck, Don announced, smiling and
looking at us: “I have a surprise for you two.”
   We watched him curiously and were puzzled as he looked at his wristwatch.
      He explained: “I have a bottle of wine for all of us to drink a toast to the
New Year of 1980.”
      He then went over to the portable cooler and brought a bottle of wine
and three glasses. All three of us pronounced the toast simultaneously, rais¬
ing our glasses and letting them touch lightly in the cool air as we declared:
“To the New Year . . . May it bring hope, peace and prosperity to all
mankind . . . And to the liberation of Azania!”


“Tsogang tlheng bathong! Tlayang tlheng le tlo bonang!” (Oh wake up,
people, please! Oh please do come and see!)
  The first to respond to the urgent call was Mphonyana (little Mpho).
Ntate Dono had been calling; he had been trying to rouse us. He had never
slept. The patient wakefulness he had developed over'many years as an angler,
had come as second nature to him. He once quoted James Rennie who in
1823 had said: “Angling is a sport that requires as much enthusiasm as poetry,
as much patience as mathematics and as much caution as house-breaking.”
  He had failed to lure the fish to his hook—an eventuality he had pre¬
dicted even before we started on our trip. He had therefore not been dis¬
heartened by the extent to which a novice would have been.
  When the sun’s first rays touched the clouds over the horizon, his keen
fisherman’s eye spotted them. He had not been able to resist the overwhelm¬
ing magic of it all, and the desire to share the experience had overpowered
him. He called to us all to come and witness the fascinating spectacle.
  “Mafube ...” I deliberately choose to make use of this word in our
African vernacular because to my mind, in the English medium in which I


370     ♦   1980s
am writing, no word that I can think of describes adequately the whole
mesmerising excellence of the break of dawn than “mafube,” especially
when seen in the clear open emptiness of unspoilt nature. The word—pro¬
nounced with the middle syllable rather drawn out—captures, expresses
and implies the presence of the varying hues and their related spectral
shades; the reds, yellows, pinks and so on.
  It must have been in the hypnotising spell of those magical moments
that little Mpho reiterated Ntate Dono’s pleadings. It was not easy to be
persuaded to leave our comfortable floor beds. We were not as quick and
alert as Mpho, the aspirant angler. The urgency in her voice was what
made me shake off my inertia. She was peeping in at the tent-door calling
us to join them outside. Determined to make the most of my stay there, I
snatched the pocket camera next to my pillow and stormed out.
  I shall not try to describe the whole tantalising scenery but will leave it
to the imagination of the reader because I know that I shall fail in my
attempt. The three of us stood there amazed. Through the corner of my
eye, I could see Mpho sucking more vigorously at her thumb. We just
stared and said nothing. “Even attempting to describe all this would be
destructive—it would spoil it.” Don sighed.
   Our attention was distracted by the appearance from the thicket of a tall
dark figure. He came walking slowly along the footpath. He had his hands
tucked into his trouser pockets and plodded his way towards the end of the
path. He seemed not to be aware of our presence, but only of the glow over
the horizon, which was casting a golden aura all around. He crouched on the
piece of rock near him, all the time staring ahead. Perhaps, like most of us, he
was in pursuit of deliverance from boredom; to understand the mysteries of
“truth,” of “being,” which the ancient scholars like Pythagoras and Socrates
had tried to fathom and unravel. Two raven-like birds with long wings flut¬
tered above his head and headed towards the sun’s rays. The man lowered his
head (probably from exhaustion) and sank it into the angle between his fore¬
arm and the biceps and remained in that position like a weeping child. It was
almost tear-provoking. So moved by the spectacle was Mpho that she
remarked: “Look, he looks like someone removed his head!” To me the whole
spectacle suggested the perfect illustration of loneliness. The man was very
likely trying to escape from the helplessness of a lifetime of unfulfilled aspi¬
rations—an existence where hopes and dreams remain forever a receding
mirage. The opportunity had availed itself and he had come to the dam, even
if like so many of us he could not afford a swimsuit. The melancholy of the
entire episode of going and never arriving; of ever approaching and desiring
seemed to be embodied and finalised in those moments. I looked away and
focussed my eyes on another area far from the man. I remembered the lines
in one of the songs we played over and over again:


                 Heaven help the child who never had a home.
                 Heaven help us all.


                    The Haunting Melancholy of Klipvoordam               *   371
                  Heaven help the black man
                  If he struggles one more day
                  Heaven help the white man
                  If he turns his back away
                  Heaven help the man
                  who kicks a man and makes him crawl
                  Heaven help us all
                  who won't reach twenty-one
                  Heaven help the people
                  with their backs against the wall. . .


Brook Benton’s voice kept haunting me. I turned my head and looked at
the dejected “headless” outline of the man. Even the intrusion of another
figure, a woman, who must have decided to interrupt the sad-looking
crouching form by walking fully-clad right into the still calm water did not
seem to shake him into any response. Soon after the sun had shown its tip
above the surface of the water, he raised his head slowly, listening and
looking into the waves which were drifting in bigger and bigger circles
away from the woman’s legs. I had only taken a picture of the stooping
frame, but I knew then that I would have been happier if I had possessed
the skills of an expert artist.
  The three of us watched the man as he stood up and turned back into the
narrow path by which he had come, still looking as unaware of our presence
as when he first appeared. He trudged on and vanished into the shades,
leaving us wondering. Who knows, it could be that he had come to catch a
glimpse of, and draw strength from the magic of the gathering “mafube.”
  And the words of the ballad singer’s song kept on lingering in my mind:


                       Keep hatred from the mighty
                      And the mighty from the strong . . .
                       Heaven help us all.




            Lily Changfooty RETURN JOURNEY
                          South Africa 1982      English


Lily Changfoot’s account of running the racial gauntlet offers a vivid insight into
aspects of growing up as a Chinese girl in South Africa in the 1940s and 1950s.
Born in Prospect township, on the outskirts of Johannesburg, she lived on a farm
near Krugersdorp, attending the Krugersdorp Indian School for four years and
later St. Angela’s Convent in Kensington, Johannesburg, the private white convent
referred to in her account.
  Catholic and Anglican schools were the first white educational institutions to
admit pupils of color, and those Chinese parents who could afford the fees took


372   ♦   1980s
■advantage of this rare opportunity to give their children a private education.
Because only a handful of Chinese were accepted annually, such a privilege was
highly prized and both children and parents made sacrifices to secure it.
   Public transport was one part of daily life in South Africa in which Chinese
children encountered the “real world." Apart from trains, there were as many inci¬
dents on trams, buses, and planes. Because of the community’s ill-defined position
between black and white, their place in the apartheid scheme became the subject
of much controversy in later years when newspapers used it to ridicule the govern¬
ment’s segregation policies.
   Changfoot’s recollections were published decades after she emigrated from
South Africa to settle permanently in Canada. There she wrote a successful Chinese
cookbook as well as an inspirational work entitled The Wealth of Jesus’s Love, the
companion volume to her autobiographical A Many-Coloured South Africa: The
Diary of a Non-Person from which this chapter is taken. Her experiences are recalled
with all the sharp simplicity of childhood.
                                                                        Melanie Yap


                                         ♦

It rained that first afternoon after school. Not knowing if I were permit¬
ted inside the tram-stop shelter as it had “Whites Only”— uAlleen vir
Blankes” painted across the front, I stood outside, while the other girls were
within, sheltering from the rain. Growing up in a society in which I had
been constantly hurt—both emotionally and physically—I preferred to get
wet, rather than be embarrassed by being told to leave the shelter, espe¬
cially in front of the girls, because a policeman was standing nearby. But
having learned more about Johannesburg in due course, I did not hesitate
to use the shelter afterwards.
   Standing on the “non-White” section of the wet, grimy, concrete plat¬
form, at Jeppe Station, I was nervous, afraid and distraught. I moved from
one spot to another, trying to evade the water seeping through the steel
and concrete roof, which was actually Main Street, potholed from the
timeless pounding of streetcars.
   It was the end of my first day at St. Angela’s Convent, and the second
time I would be boarding a train, the first having been the ride into
Johannesburg of that morning from Krugersdorp. The cloudy skies matched
the dimly lit, dismal station.
   I, a Chinese, not accepted in a White society and distrusted by the
African, stood motionless, desperately awaiting the arrival of the 3:30 p.m.
train. From the corner of my eye, I could see the groups of Africans milling
about. My school hat was snatched from my head. Turning around, I saw
a Coloured youth about twenty years old, threatening to molest me.
   “Ha, here’s a pretty China girl,” he said.
   Overcome with fear and weakness, I could not cry out, but burst into tears.
   The train arrived: it was a “Godsend.” I rushed into the carriage, hop¬
ing the youth would not pursue me. My relief was brief, for when I looked


                                                       Return Journey       ♦   373
up, he was seated beside me, gloating with victory. He attempted to put his
arms around me, and tried to kiss me. Petrified, I prayed and hoped the
conductor would appear, but in the meantime wrestled and struggled.
  The first-class “non-White” compartment consisted of an enclosed four-
seat cubicle which could accommodate about ten passengers. No one could
know of my grim struggle, unless the conductor came through. No working
African was in a financial position to travel first class. This compartment
was used by non-White “professionals” such as Indian and Coloured school
teachers and the odd “outsider” like me.
  I was used to being insulted, cheated and sneered at, the price of being
born with a yellow-skin. But I had never experienced the terrible situation
of a helpless girl being attacked in a lonely train compartment.
  Up to then I had become resigned to the fact that I was a “second-class”
citizen, and had become immune to taunts, ridicule and profanity at its
worst, hurled at me. To return hate for hate would only degrade and lessen
my human dignity. But at this moment, seated in the compartment, I was
overcome with hate at this half-breed, forgetting my own afflictions and
colour. I detested him, not because of his birth, but that he should choose
an innocent girl not responsible for his circumstances, to let off steam. I
screamed, shouted, and pounded on the door separating us from the con¬
ductor’s compartment. I was in a fit of rage, and determined to cause him
such annoyance that he would refrain from touching me.
  About ten minutes later, which seemed an eternity, the conductor came
through the second-class door, evidently working his way down from the
third-class carriages occupied entirely by Africans. They were usually so
overcrowded that it has happened that a passenger got trampled to death.
I recall a dear old servant who remarked, “It is not that there are no trains,
but they are so overfull that they cannot fit in another person.”
  My distress was obvious to the White conductor. As far as he was con¬
cerned, the youth could molest me, but since he was on duty on this train
he wanted to avoid trouble. He reprimanded the youth, and with a shake
of his fist expelled him from the train at the next station. That ordeal left
me more determined than ever to continue my schooling.
  Through the years of high school, I encountered and crossed three
social, racial and economic barriers each day, tasting the sweetness and the
bitterness of each. The bitterness was greater.
  Occasionally during school hours I would be told that I was looking
tired. “Just a little worn-out,” I’d reply. I did not bother to enumerate the
harassing conditions and situations that I was subjected to daily—being
“caught in the middle”—neither Black nor White.
  As a South African Chinese, I was sandwiched between Black and
White. Despite their rationalizations against me, I do not hate them, nor
am I vengeful: only grieved that South Africa, such a beautiful country, is
made ugly by its policiesJl’m saddened by my student memories, but prize
the education I gained.


374   ♦   1980s
            “Thandi'ive Mhlanga,”Angela Kotler,
                       and Hazel Hall,
             Arrested for Being Women
                           Zimbabwe 1983        English


On 28 October 1983 the Zimbabwe government launched a campaign against pros¬
titution that resulted in the arrest and imprisonment of 6,316 women throughout
Zimbabwe. Hundreds of women were kept in local prisons and several thousand
were sent to an old military camp in the Zambezi Valley. The Vagrancy Law, under
which the arrests were made, was amended retrospectively to enable the police to
hold them for longer than the forty-eight hours allowed under the law. The cam¬
paign was called “Operation Clean-Up,” and women were arrested indiscrimi¬
nately—grandmothers, schoolgirls, nurses coming off duty. Simply to be a woman
was to risk arrest. As a result of this attack a handful of ordinary black and white
women came together and mounted a nationwide protest, in the face of which the
government, after a few weeks, abandoned the operation. But the group of protest¬
ers remained together, determined that such an outrage should never again be per¬
petrated against women. The group recorded the testimonies of some of the arrested
women, two of which appear here—that of “Thandiwe Mhlanga” from Harare, and
that of Angela Kotler and Hazel Hall from Gweru. (A pseudonym has been used to
protect the identity of the woman from Harare; the women from Gweru have since
left Zimbabwe.) The protesters remained together as a pressure group and in 1987
were registered as the Women’s Action Group (WAG). They are still active today,
protecting and furthering the legal, educational, economic, and human rights of
women. Their story is told in Determined to Act, published by WAG in 1998.
                                                                    Peggy Watson


                                         ♦

“Thandiwe Mhlanga,” Harare
On 29 October I was walking home alone down Fourth Street, at about 8
p.m., after visiting my sister and her husband. I was approached by a group
of about seven men, two in the blue uniform of the Police Reserve, the
others in plain clothes, and was told I was under arrest. They asked me
where I was going, where I lived, and where I had been, but ignored my
answers. They told me I had to go with them to Central Police Station.
   There was a large group of women in the street at the time, all under
arrest. There was another group of men who had been with the women.
They were not under arrest, just trailing behind.
   I ran away from the police to my flat but they followed me and banged on
my door. I was forced to open it. I showed them the flat. They asked me who
paid for it. I told them I was working at the Ministry of Education as a reg¬
istry clerk and paid for it myself. They insisted a man must be paying for it.

                                         Arrested for Being Women           ♦   375
They took me to the police station. There were a lot of women there. We were
asked our names and addresses. They wrote “Prostitution” after all our names.
At least one woman was handcuffed. They took us to Chikurubi. There were
men, women, everybody altogether. They gave us each a blanket. This was on
Saturday night. On Monday we were interviewed by Social Welfare and again
“Prostitution” was written after our names. When we asked why they were
doing this we were told that they had been told to do it.
  During this time we were given some food but it was inedible. You
couldn’t feed it to dogs. While I was there there was a riot by some people
who were detained. Tear gas was used to break up the riot. The police had
threatened us and treated us very badly. They threatened to hit us and were
very rough. I was with some nurses. The police said to the nurses, “So you earn
your own money. We want to see how you are going to spend it in Chikurubi.”
  On Monday afternoon my sister came with evidence of my job and I
was released.
  I now feel uncomfortable at work. People are joking about it, implying
that I am a prostitute. My supervisor is deliberately picking on me. I
intend to apply for a transfer from my department.


Angela Kotler and Hazel Hall, Gweru
On Friday 11 November, 1983, we had been to see a film, Wild Geese, at the
Gweru theatre. We were leaving at about 9.30 P.M. when some armed sol¬
diers came into the foyer and grabbed hold of us. When we tried to resist
they became extremely agitated and started pushing and shoving and threat¬
ening. They were just grabbing women, mainly black women. We were
dragged away from our friends. Outside the theatre it was chaos, a huge
crowd, people protesting, shouting, crying and all the women being put into
land cruisers. In the one we were in there were two girls who were only 14.
We were taken to Gweru prison and told to sit on the ground in the rain.
There we waited until more truckloads arrived. Then we were herded into
cells. We two held hands and went into the same cell. It was about 3m x 5m
and there were 17 of us in there and also a tiny baby. It was stiflingly hot. No
attempt was made to take our names or identify us and at no time did any¬
one explain to us what we were being arrested for or what was to happen to
us. We were not allowed to contact friends or relatives and a lawyer who
tried to see us was refused access. The lights were turned on and off about
an hour at a time. For several hours we could hear more women being
brought in, then someone shouted that we must be quiet and gradually the
shouting and the crying stopped.
                                                                Angela Kotler
                                                                    Hazel Hall



                          *




376   ♦   1980s
                Regina Ntongana, CROSSROADS
                            South Africa 1984        English


In 1986, in Crossroads, a squatter camp near Cape Town, one of the most brutal
forced removals in the history of South Africa took place. This was in response to the
increasing threat of the powerful political activity in the area, as residents resisted the
“offer” of new houses in New Crossroads, where rents would be high and resettlement
would fracture the political solidarity and support of the existing community. Regina
Ntongana, who had lived in Crossroads since 1975 and who was elected chairperson
of the Crossroads Women’s Committee in 1976, had been crucially involved in build¬
ing up this sense of community in the fight against apartheid.
   In this interview, given at least two years before the final massive forced removal
and at a time of relative optimism about their resistance to it, Ntongana casts back
to the personal circumstances that led her to live in Crossroads. She speaks of the
deaths from starvation ot her children in the Transkei, where she had been forced
to live, and the urgency of her need to live with her husband in a community that
could offer schools, clinics, and the possibility of work. She describes the birth of a
local women’s movement. She speaks in English, not her mother tongue.
   On one occasion in 1983 (not referred to in this interview) when Ntongana was
being terrorized, she made a statement, published on 31 December 1983 in the
Cape Times: “We, the women, are the foundations of Crossroads. Since the men
took over [in 1979], things have never been the same. The men are only concerned
with their own benefits.”
   That her husband Jeffrey had been secretary of the Crossroads Executive
Committee (though he resigned in April 1983) added to Ntonganas difficulty in
working with the Crossroads Women’s Committee. In the interview published
below, she briefly refers to the domestic awkwardness that ensued, and speaks of it
slightly more fully in an earlier interview with Josette Cole in 1983 (published in
Cole’s book Crossroads [1987]), conceptualizing the difficulty as a conflict between
her commitment to women and to her husband:                There were days [when we]
weren’t speaking. And the women were also looking at me to see which way I
would blow. I can say it was almost divorce.”
                                                                           Dorothy Driver


                                             ♦


I first came to Cape Town in 1959 because the granny I was staying with
passed away. When I got here there was a big fight because the women
didn’t want to carry passes—I was very young and didn’t know nothing
about strikes—back there we doesn’t know about strikes. My mother was
one of the Federation women, when I came I found they was always hav¬
 ing meetings and talk about this. It was difficult to me because I didnt
 know about it. ... I mean I just listened to them and sometimes I went to
 meetings or I asked my mother, “What’s going on, why are you trying to


                                                                  Crossroads        ♦   377
be against the government?”: then she was sitting down and trying to
explain to me.
      I always saw my father just as strong as her, they were both strong, but
he believed that a woman is stronger than a man. He always said, “If a
woman say a thing she’s not going to change, she’s going to do it.” At that
time, too, it did seem to me that the women were stronger, because there
was this big raid by the administration board in Nyanga—the men were
beaten up but the women were shouting and swearing at the police: the
inspectors did nothing to them; they were marching and singing songs,
freedom songs.
   When I got married in 1964 I was staying at Nyanga with my husband’s
family and there was a rule, a sort of law that if you stayed with people you
must be registered that you are a lodger. So we went to the office and they
tell me my husband is not qualified to stay because he hasn’t worked ten
years in one place—he was a labourer at Park Gate, Strand Street, but only
for four years. So that means that I have to leave, although I have been
born in Cape Town.
   I went to Transkei, to my husband’s family; it was so sad and bitter to
me that sometimes I just have to cry. But he couldn’t do nothing. I could¬
n’t do nothing. He say to me, “If you going to come up they’re going to
arrest you every time.” But later on, when two of the children were dead, I
just decide I must come up. I come with two, two were already dead, died
in Transkei ... we were starving in Transkei, I must say it. There wasn’t
doctors there, they were miles away. When I came to the doctor the child
was already passed away. It was really and truly starving, all we had was
stamp mealies, no fat, a piece of meat if a cattle die. Sometimes we have to
drink dirty water; you just take a white cloth and then have to strain it
because it’s dirty, the cattle are drinking the same water, there’s no other
place. My baby was seven months when it died, the other one was two
years and four months.
  I decided they can do what they like to me, but I am not prepared to stay
any more in Transkei, so I came up with the train. My husband was living
in the single men’s barracks at Langa, so he took mfe to his auntie and we
lodged there, but it was really very difficult, they arrest us every time. We
live like that for three years, and then decide we must go to the bushes, for
the people there would help us find a place to stay—a few coloureds were
staying there, and they say we can stay with them. That was not Crossroads,
but an earlier camp: we built a shack for the family. There were water, but
no lavatories, just a hole in the ground, and for rubbish collection we dig
another hole. Then after a time it was the administration board that said we
must go to the emergency camp at Crossroads, because we was in a coloured
area . . . they show us Crossroads, and we came here in February ’75. It was
called a “site and service” camp—at first they didn’t try to make us leave.
  Between 75 and 77 we'came to be strong, because we had all these meet¬
ings every day; we share our views and our thoughts on each and everything,


378    ♦   1980s
even before the removals. When we first came we decide to make a meeting
of women community members, we must elect a few because when the board
came during the day the men are at work, only we women are there. It was
up to us to find out who is arrest and who is not arrest; then we decided to
go and see the lawyers and that’s really how we came to be a community, a
women’s community at Crossroads.
  It was an elected committee after our outside meetings; we decided we
must have some in front to lead, we must know who is going to work—so
we elected thirty women ... at first the men didn’t like it, they say we do
things too fast for them. Later they decide also they must have a men’s
committee, to come behind us and see what’s going on. But the problem
for the men was that they were working, and during the day we was going
to all the offices to find out what was going on! So we know more than the
men . . . sometimes when we put the agenda to them they start to be jeal¬
ous and they say why does we always know the things; how does we always
know the things? Some of them were really jealous, they stop us to have a
meeting . . . later on, when we thought, as women, we must sit down and
show how things are happening, really they did accept us.
   I suppose we did win that fight, to stay here in Cape Town, and to stay
in Crossroads. But now we don’t want to go to the New Crossroads they
building, now that the demolition of our camp is no longer in front of us.
Even though they are brick houses, with running water, and lavatories and
bathrooms—the rents are too high. Some of them doesn’t work, some are
widows, so they are really afraid of it . . . they wouldn’t mind if the gov¬
ernment can leave the squatters’ camp. It’s my feeling too, although I know
I did spoke with the government and tried to say we want better condi¬
tions. Crossroads is all right except when it’s raining and it gets muddy;
but we have got clinics here, we have each other. We’re like the township
and we wouldn’t mind to stay here.
   We really developed a good system as a community. If there’s something
wrong, we make an agenda—and first the committee decide what it can do,
but it doesn’t just finish there: we take it as it is and share it with the gen¬
eral residents. And when we’ve had a meeting to negotiate we also take it
back to all the residents. We call meetings: we’ve got loudhailers, both men
and women using loudhailers. We as women reporting some of the matters,
although not for a time because there was a misunderstanding between the
 men and the women, but now things are coming right. It was funny, really,
because it was the women who started the struggle—but for a time it was
 decided that we should have only one committee, and that it should be men.
 But now things are all right again because they want the women’s group
 again—tbey say things doesn’t go right like they did when we was doing it.
   My husband—sometimes he likes my actions, I must say it. But then
 suddenly he change and it makes it look as though I like to be boss. Then
we sit down and we talk each one and it helps . . . sometimes he say to me,
 “You were really good then, that really helped us.” He does give support.


                                                         Crossroads      ♦   379
      We know that black people in other parts of the country look to us—
I’m proud when they do it. What made us to be so strong is the struggle
and the hard feeling, we are really struggling hard, and so we thought we
must stay together: if only they can stay together they can be strong like
us. And our women, if we see something wrong we discuss it, never mind
it takes the whole night, we don’t care. If we doesn’t understand it, we
doesn’t close that meeting, we sit down and discuss—and we wake up
tomorrow morning with better thoughts. We sit together every day if nec¬
essary, so it’s not to say I’m going to put my views alone, but the other one,
and the other one—that makes a community really to be together and
strong.
      But it was not only meetings—when we decided and had a vote we would
take fast action: going to an office here, telling this one we will not be
dumped, saying things to the newspapers. We were planning everything, we
went to the lawyers. Then the minister had to make a plan, they could not
just pick us up and arrest us because the whole community would be stand¬
ing there. They would strike at night, and in the morning it would be there
in the newspaper. We were fast as anything—we didn’t have telephones, but
we were fast to call our friends and neighbours, to call help where we need
help. Now we would like to help these new people being dumped near us.


                                                     Transcribed by Beat a Lipman




                   Nehambo Magdalena Shamena,
               Kandishiwo—I Don’t Know
                          Namibia 1984       oshiNdonga


Nehambo Magdalena Iihuhua and her husband, Ndeuhmane Erastus Shamena,
joined the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) shortly after its
founding in 1960. Along with thousands of other Namibians, Magdalena and
Erastus Shamena left for exile in 1974, leaving their six young children behind in the
care of Magdalena’s brother. Shamena became one of the first SWAPO women to
undergo military training in Zambia. Her letter to the United Nations in 1973 (see
the text titled “Emergency Call from the Women of Namibia”) marked another first,
as she placed the suffering and resilience of Namibian women in a global context.
Writing her autobiography was also a pioneering act.
   Autobiographies of SWAPO freedom fighters form a significant genre of
Namibian struggle literature from the 1960s to the 1980s. With the exception of
We Children of Namibia by Magdalena and Erastus Shamena—who wrote alternate
chapters these were all written by men. This book, based on original accounts in
oshiNdonga, has been published only in Finnish and German.
   Magdalena Shamena s writing is unique as she describes her husband’s arrest
and detention in Pretoria, South Africa, in 1967. She depicts the warm and close
relationship she shares with her husband and the difficulty of coping with her anx-

380    ♦   1980s
iety, advanced pregnancy, and four small, frightened children as she tries to man¬
age her work as a teacher and find her husband.
   In exile in the 1980s the Shamenas opposed the SWAPO leadership when its
security department detained and tortured hundreds of the organization’s members
in Angola as alleged “spies,” a scandal that is still unresolved but one in which the
Shamenas remained closely involved. Erastus Shamena was a founder of the
“Breaking the Wall of Silence Movement,” a group that works for opening up the
debate about illegal detentions by SWAPO and rehabilitating former detainees.
After returning to Namibia, Magdalena Shamena put much of her energy into the
movement for gender equality until her death.
                                                                        Heike Becker




When Erastus returned from Windhoek in the evening he was very tired
and did not even want to eat. The next morning, I tried to convince him
to have at least a cup of tea before leaving for school but he said: “I’m not
hungry right now. I’ll come at ten during break time to have some ontaku.
Right now I’m fine.”
   “Please, don’t go without having had anything. At least have some tea
and bread.”
   My eyes followed him when he left. Standing at the fence, I watched
him. I was seven months pregnant with our fifth child. Erastus s back dis¬
appeared behind the trees.
   Then I also left for school. After the morning prayer one of my col¬
leagues said jokingly: “Meme Shamena, did your husband go for a ride
with the Boers?”
   “With the Boers?”
   “I saw him and Shoombe in the car.”
   To me, this was where the joke ended. I began to ask questions; some other
people had seen them as well. So it had indeed happened. They had been
 detained. I did not remain at school; instead I went to see the principal of the
 training seminar. He reported briefly that the police had come and had taken
 Erastus in for interrogation. He had been picked up from the classroom.
    That day it was raining. I asked Kalle whether he could take me to
 Oshakati but he said he could only do this after three o’clock. Therefore, I
 went home. In the afternoon we drove to Oshakati and went straight to see
 the chief of the police. There things were very busy. All the time soldiers
 came and left. They carried heavy boxes. Kalle said the boxes contained
 ammunition. More and more soldiers arrived. Then we were received by
 the chief of the police. Kalle said: “We’ve come here to look for one of our
 teachers. He is a teacher at the training college. He was brought here ear¬
 lier today and those who arrested him said he would be released before two
 o’clock. But now it’s well past two and he still isn’t back.”
    “Whom are you talking about?”
    “Erastus Shamena. This is his wife. She wants to know where her hus¬

 band is.”

                                           Kandishiwo—I Don’t Know            ♦   381
      “I see—so this is Mrs. Shamena.”
      “I’ve heard of people being tortured and being burnt with electricity.”
      “Who’s been telling you this? There is no electricity where Erastus is. He’s
fine. He is as well as he was this morning when he left home. Don’t worry.”
      And yet—this very moment Erastus was being tortured with electrical
shocks.
      The chief of the police told me to leave. I thought he did not want to let
me sit so long inside; after all I was seven months pregnant. I waited in the
car. Kalle came soon enough. When we were on the way back to Ongwediva
he stopped and said: “Please don’t get a shock, Magdalena. I know you
believe in God and that he guides everything. I have to tell you something
heavy. The police officer said that Erastus’s case has not been cleared up. He
will be sent to Pretoria.”
      “Why? What has he done?”
      “He didn’t give any reason. He only said that the case has not been
cleared up yet.”
      What could I do? I went home. The children were already waiting.
Immediately they said: “Meme, Tate is still not back from school.”—
“Where is Tate?”
      What was I supposed to tell them? Softly I said: “The police has
arrested Tate and taken him to Oshakati. He won’t come back now.”
      The children started crying, and I cried with them.
      “Tate, Tate, where are you?”
      “We don’t know where he is. We can’t see him. But there is the one who
sees him and knows where he is. Crying doesn’t change anything. Let us pray.”
      One after another the children said a small prayer. From then on we did
this every night.
      “Jesus, our lord, you know where Tate is. You know what he eats. You
know when he sleeps. Guard him and protect him. Grace his food. Give
him strength.”
  We also sang in the evening. I was especially fond of the hymn that
goes: “I don’t understand everything. Please, do guide us.” I was pregnant
and sometimes not in control of my nerves. My rxiother and my grand¬
mother feared that all this crying might have dire consequences. In order
to hear whether the baby was okay I went to the hospital for a check-up.
Everything was fine. No police officers harassed us while I was pregnant.
I was allowed a peaceful time with the children. When my time came I
went to Onandjokwe hospital to give birth.
  While I was there in the maternity ward one of the Finnish midwives
asked me: “Meme Magdalena, do you know where Erastus is?”
  “Kandishiwo—I don’t know.”
  When the baby came she was very weak. She could not even breathe on
her own. She did not cry either. The midwife nicknamed the baby Kandi¬
shiwo. This name stuck w*ith her for a long time.
  The delivery was not complicated or painful. In me there was a much


382     ♦   1980s
bigger pain than the pains of labour. I thought of Erastus. All along I won¬
dered where he might be.
  I even considered that he might be dead already. There were rumours
around that prisoners were thrown out of a helicopter when it flew over the
desert.
   Next to me in the ward was a lady from a royal family. Her relatives
came to visit often and brought all kinds of different food. I just turned to
the wall, crying. I had no idea where Erastus was, but still I did not want
anybody to see my grief. Very often my prayer was just a sigh: “Lord, you
do know Erastus."
   I returned home with my little Kandishiwo. Friends came to greet me.
They brought food, flowers and other gifts. Among them were Namibian
nurses but also some missionaries.
   I decided to wait with Kandishiwo’s christening until Erastus would be
home. I was absolutely sure that he had not done anything for which he could
be jailed for life. I firmly believed that he would come back. I consulted some
pastors. All of them agreed that I was right. Should the baby fall seriously ill
we could baptize her quickly. Otherwise we would wait for her father to
return. God made sure little Kandishiwo stayed in good health. [. . .]


I won’t allow them to hold me up.
   Erastus was said to be in prison but for months I had not had any news
from him. He could as well have been dead. Everywhere in the world there
are prisoners but their relatives know of their whereabouts and can even
visit them in jail.
   One of Erastus’s colleagues, Hosea Namupala, went to South Africa and
brought back the news that those that had been arrested would be put on
trial within the coming months. This is when I got the idea to travel to
Pretoria to listen to the court proceedings. Immediately I went to see
Johanna Shoombe. We decided that together we would go to see Shakomba,
 a black policeman, to ask him whether he had any news. All we heard from
 him, however, was that our husbands were not dead. Time passed. The trial
was about to start. We could even read about it in the newspapers.
   “Listen, Johanna, I’m planning to go and see Dr. Olivier. He is the highest-
 ranking white official here. I’m going to ask him whether I can go to Pretoria
 to listen to the proceedings. Everywhere on this earth wives are allowed to
 attend their husbands’ cases. Why shouldnt I be allowed to do it?
   We discussed practical things, such as money. All would work out if only
 we got permission to travel. Johanna seemed to be excited, too. But then she
 mentioned our plans to some pastors and teachers at the training college.
 These men tried to talk us out of it: “These days the Boers don’t even shy
 back from beating women. Let’s not do this thing, please.”
    I would not even listen. I thanked them for the assistance offered, which
 I valued, but continued: “I want to go myself. If I 11 be arrested or beaten
 because I inquire about my husband, so be it. I have to know how he is. I


                                        Kandishiwo—I     Don’t Know      ♦   383
know very well what Erastus has done. If ever he had committed a crime
and wouldn’t tell me about it, I had to go and ask him myself.”
      The men thought I was stubborn but didn’t put any more pressure on me.
      “Well, you can see it this way, too. Do what you like.”
      My brother Frans was working as an interpreter in Olivier’s office at the
time. I went to see him and told him that I needed an appointment with
Olivier. Johanna would come as well. Frans did not say much. He just
moaned: “Well, the Boers may give you trouble.”
      “I’m already having difficulties. I won’t find peace of mind as long as I
don’t know where Erastus is.”
      When school was over on Wednesday we went to Oshakati. Olivier
greeted us in his office: “What can I do for you, ladies?”
      “Our husbands have been arrested. They are in Pretoria. We hear that
there’ll be a trial. We want to know whether our husbands are among those
to be put on trial. We intend to travel to Pretoria to be present during the
verdict and sentencing.”
   The man was clearly taken by surprise. He obviously had had no idea of
our concern.
      “What are your husbands’ names?”
      “Jonathan Shoombe and Erastus Shamena.”
      “All right. I’ll ask Ondangwa quickly.”
  After speaking on the phone for a while he came back to us.
   “Your husbands are not on the list of the accused. They are not even in
jail anymore. They are living peacefully in the location in Pretoria. No
need to worry, ladies. They are having a good time there. They go to the
movies in the evening, and there are gorgeous women in South Africa.”
  Johanna got angry. She hit with her fist on the table: “I have no parents.
All I have is my husband. You are going to speak the truth now! You tell
me, now, now, where he is, the only person I have. If he is not in prison,
then where is he? Why can’t I see him?”
  Olivier had to realize that we had not come in a joking mood.
  I said: “I have five kids with this man Erastus. I need him to look after
them. One of the kids is a small baby. I can’t cope bn my own. Erastus is
having a good time in Pretoria while I’m struggling with the kids? What’s
the real story now?”
  “Listen. It’s exactly as I said: They won’t be put on trial. And you can’t
go there. They will come back soon. You can write a letter, all right, and
also send pictures. We’ll pass these on.”
  “We’ll do this. But if they don’t come back soon we’ll be back here. It’s
impossible that they stay there out of their own free will.”
  We wrote the letters. In September I received a reply from Erastus. He
had written in English although he knew that I did not read this language.
Frans translated the letter for me. Some of it had been blackened. Frans
could not read these parts but when Mikko Ihamaki returned from his
home leave, he and his wife came to see me. He held the letter up against


384     ♦   1980s
the light and read the blackened parts. He said Erastus had written about
his time in prison. Later Erastus confirmed this. He never got the second
letter I wrote.


                                       Translated from German by Heike Becker




              Kristina Rungano, THE WOMAN
                           Zimbabwe 1984       English


Kristina Rungano Masuwa (in her nom de plume, she dropped the family name)
was born in Zimbabwe on 28 February 1963. Her father was a small businessman.
After her schooling she went to the United Kingdom to train as a computer sci¬
entist, returning to Zimbabwe in 1982 to work for a couple of years in her profes¬
sion. At the end of this interval, she left again for the United Kingdom, where she
has since been living and writing poetry.
   In 1984, Rungano published A Storm Is Brewing, a collection of about seventy
poems, most of which she wrote as an eighteen-year-old schoolgirl. At the time of
its publication, the whole volume aroused much attention through its freshness of
voice and uninhibited search for self-knowledge. In “The Woman” the female per¬
sona addresses a man for whose pleasure the world turns. Her longing for gentle¬
ness and beauty contrasts sharply with the pain of her permanent subservience. The
poem is an outspoken and bold statement by a young girl in Zimbabwe of the
1980s.
                                                                    Flora Veit-Wild


                                         ♦

   A minute ago I came from the well
   Where young women drew water like myself
   My body was weary and my heart tired.
   For a moment I watched the stream that rushed before me;
   And thought how fresh the smell of flowers,
    How young the grass around it.
   And yet again I heard the sound of duty
   Which ground on me—made me feel aged
   As I bore the great big mud container on my head
    Like a great big painful umbrella.
    Then I got home and cooked your meal
    For you had been out drinking the pleasures of the flesh
   While I toiled in the fields.
    Under the angry vigilance of the sun
    A labour shared only by the bearings of my womb.
    I washed the dishes; yours



                                                            The Woman       ♦   385
      And swept the room we shared
      Before I set forth to prepare your bedding
      In the finest corner of the hut
      Which was bathed by the sweet smell of dung
      I had this morning applied to the floors
      Then you came in,
      In your drunken lust
      And you made your demands
      When I explained how I was tired
      And how I feared for the child—yours; I carried
      You beat me and had your way
      At that moment
      You left me unhappy and bitter
      And I hated you;
      Yet tomorrow I shall again wake up to you
      Milk the cow, plough the land and cook your food,
      You shall again be my Lord
      For isn’t it right that woman should obey,
      Love, serve and honour her man?
      For are you not fruit of the land?




             Athaliah Molokomme, Leloba Molema,
            Opha Dube, Motsei Madisa, Ruth Motsete>
                   and Onalenna Selolwane,
            Citizenship: An Open Letter to
                the Attorney-General
                             Botswana 1985       English


Until the mid-1980s, the women’s organizations that existed in Botswana tended to
fall into one of three categories: those directed at home improvement; those, like the
Young Women’s Christian Association, directed toward improving the quality of life
for young women; or professional bodies with worldwide branches, such as the
Professional and Business Women’s Association. Then in 1982, the Citizenship Act
was amended to deny citizenship to children of married parents whose mothers were
Batswana but whose fathers were foreigners; in other words, citizenship was defined
through the “legitimate” male line. Several newspapers carried letters from women
challenging this narrow definition of citizenship, pointing out the unfairness to chil¬
dren whose parents were married and therefore lived according to socially accepted
standards. To protest this amendment, a different kind of women’s group was founded
called Emang Basadi (a phrase that comes from the national anthem, meaning liter¬
ally “Stand up, women!”). Erlang Basadi successfully enlisted the support of women’s
and human rights organizations overseas for its first project: to raise funds for a test
case brought by Unity Dow, a woman with Botswana citizenship married to a U.S.

386     ♦   1980s
citizen whose children, therefore, were excluded from Botswana citizenship. Dow
challenged the constitutionality of the amendment, and with the help of Emang
Basadi, won her case. The hope was that all Botswana’s laws would be tested for sex¬
ism and brought in line with the equality guaranteed by the constitution, but the
Attorney General’s Chambers has limited itself to dealing with cases as they come up.
   The writing in this piece is lucid, fluent, cheeky, and polemical, and captures
the mood of a time when women in Botswana began to involve themselves in
shaping the issues that concerned them.
                                                   Leloba Molema and Mary Lederer


                                          ♦

YOUR HONOUR—This letter is prompted by the comments attributed to
you by the Botswana GUARDIAN of October 11th, 1985, headlined “Don’t
marry a stranger if you don’t want his citizenship.”
   According to The GUARDIAN you made three main points:
(1) You ask why a woman would marry a man whose citizenship she does
    not want for herself and her children.
(2) You are quoted as having said that general international practice holds
    that citizenship by descent is through the male parent except in cases
    where the mother is unwed.
(3) You apparently argue that most Batswana women would be against
     their children acquiring citizenship through them because they them¬
     selves believe in being dominated by men. This you say is in the nature
   of our society.”
   We wish to respond to these three points in the order in which they
were made.
  First, Your Honour is misleading the public by implying that women are
 (morally or legally?) bound to assume the citizenship of their husbands—
 even under Botswana law! Moreover, it seems to us that the kind of women
you have in mind are more a figment of your imagination than real women
 in real life. The latter, for your information, Your Honour, marry not the
 various citizenships but the men in and for themselves.
    What is more, they do not look for protection from them principally but
 for partnership, and partnership is guaranteed when both man and woman
 contribute to their relationship from positions of mutual strength. Your
 argument encourages dependence rather than partnership.
    We are indeed aware that in traditional Setswana logic, women were
 objects of male protection. At the same time, we are also more than aware
 that in practical terms, this same logic did not exclude women from par¬
 ticipating in decisions affecting them and their families. But unfortunately
 traditional Setswana logic and practice is being distorted by modern males
 (led in this instance by Your Honour).
    Traditional Setswana society had no alternative but to recognise the pos¬
 itive economic contribution of women because its insistence on collectivity
 left nearly all of arable agriculture and the distribution of its fruits in the


         Citizenship: An Open Letter to the Attorney-General                  ♦   387
hands of women. This means in effect that the Tswana State was, and is still
being, led by its women. This is why avenues existed for regular consulta¬
tion in decision-making.
      Another area calling for corporate decision-making on a regular basis
included the status of children as they went through the rites of passage
(e.g. questions of marriage in which maternal uncles and paternal aunts
played a leading role, to mention but one instance). It is thus surprising,
Your Honour, that you use the same Setswana culture to deny women a say
in the citizenship of their children.
      In response to your second point, we wish that you clarify precisely what
you mean by “international practice” since according to you (as reported by
    1 he GUARDIAN) dual citizenship became unpopular after the 1960s. By
that date we take it that by “international practice” you mean in reality
post-independence Africa.
      But we know, Your Honour, that Africa of the post-independence era
has not always been a model of democracy and justice, and we suggest that
the further afield one looks in this matter the better—to the aphorism of
a Swiss called Max Frisch for example, who said, “Democracy is there not
so much to be defended as to be established.” All of Africa, including our
“Shining” democratic Republic of Botswana, would do well to keep this
aphorism squarely in mind.
      In addition, we would also like to point out that because the Citizenship
Act denies Batswana women the right to marry whoever they love and to
live with them wherever they see fit, we are already thinking of how to cir¬
cumvent its provisions. Your Honour, we shall “live in sin” with the men we
love so that our children may retain Botswana citizenship.
      In response to your third point we confidently challenge your conclu¬
sion that only a small proportion of Batswana women would support an
appeal for citizenship to be acquired through the female parent because of
the “nature of our society.” May we know the following about the statistics
you base your views upon:—
•    Who, in terms of sex, were the people you interviewed?
•    Where are they normally resident?
•    Which of them have never been to school?
•    Have they been to school up to standard three? Up to standard seven?
     Up to J.C.? Up to matric? Up to university?
•    What was the size of the sample you interviewed?
     According to the report of the Law Reform Committee (of which you
are an Honourable member) a total of twenty-seven people were orally
interviewed in Mochudi, Kanye and Good Hope and a number of unspec¬
ified written submissions received. Are we to understand that this is the
“majority” you are referring to?
     What do you actually mean by the “nature of our society”? Haven’t we
all, women as well as med, been colonised? And haven’t we all, since then,
even had to restructure ourselves and our institutions in order to keep


388     ♦   1980s
abreast of the change by bending with the wind, thereby accommodating
forces which we were in no position to halt?
   Is it “in the nature of our society” for example that chiefs rule not in
their own right, but are now answerable to Parliament?
   Is it “in the nature of our society” that thousands of people leave Botswana
each year to work in South Africa? Is it “in the nature of our society” that
there is a preponderance of female-headed households? That there are all
manner of non-Batswana people working in Botswana, and that we ourselves
go to places outside Botswana for conferences, protracted studies, seeing
friends, relatives or simply to have a holiday?
    Since our whole society has had to undergo a drastic re-organisation
ever since we were colonised, and the momentum seems to have increased
since independence, what makes you think, Your Honour, that male/female
relationships have themselves remained static? In any case what criteria do
you (and others we have charged with making responsible decisions on our
behalf) use to retain some aspects of “our culture” and abandon others?
  We are not arguing for blanket dual citizenship, but rather that children
born to a Botswana parent (irrespective of sex and marital status) have suf¬
ficient descent links with this country to be given an option to acquire its
citizenship. The apparent tendency to view this issue as being purely a
question to women’s rights causes hostility. The hostility is in turn justified
by allegations that only elite or “radical” women, who are a small minority,
feel strongly about this issue. The reality however is that for historical rea¬
sons, men and women continue to marry one another across borders which
in any event are of relatively recent creation.
   In our case, intermarriage between Batswana and people who live in the
countries bordering ours is a fact of life: e.g. South Africa, Zimbabwe and
Namibia. These are not always members of the elite but mostly “ordinary”
people living their lives with those they wish to share it with. It is abun¬
dantly clear that those living within our north eastern and north western
borders were not consulted in this case. Why was this so? Why only con¬
sult 27 people in three southern villages?
   It is in the light of the above that we wish Your Honour and the Law
Reform Committee to reconsider your grounds for having recommended
the unjust abolition of dual citizenship as it relates to children of Batswana
mothers and non-Batswana fathers. We intend to make further recom¬
mendations for the abolition of this part of the law and other laws and
practices that are unjust.
              Athaliah Molokomme, Leloba Molema, Opha Dube, Motsei
                  Madisa, Ruth Motsete, Onalenna Selolwane, GABORONE.




        Citizenship: An Open Letter to the Attorney-General ♦ 389
           Nise Malange, I, THE UNEMPLOYED
                          South Africa 1985      English


Nise Malange, a celebrated performance poet particularly concerned with the posi¬
tion of women, was born near Cape Town in 1960 and grew up in a one-room shel¬
ter. Because her mother was classified “coloured” and her father “African,” she was
doubly penalized by the apartheid laws. When her family moved to Guguletu in
1966, she was sent away to a “coloured” school in Elsies River. In 1975 her family
sent her to school in the Transkei. About this move she said, “When I was leaving
Cape Town, the only thing in my heart was that I’m going to have very fresh food
and live a life where I won’t see a policeman, no thugs, no harassments.” She was
sent back to Cape Town during the 1976-1977 uprising. Then her parents sent her
to Ciskei; this is where Malange witnessed extreme deprivation and poverty. After
rioting broke out at her school, she was expelled and sent home again. In 1982
Malange migrated to Howick in Natal, to live with another branch of her family.
   While still at school, she and her brother started a small student players’ group
which performed in the streets and community centers, usually putting on sketches
about topical issues such as the 1976 rebellion and the granting of “independence”
to the Transkei. When Malange arrived in Durban to work for the Transport and
General Workers’ Union, her interest in theater led her to join in making the
Dunlop Workers' Play, which demonstrated the forces controlling the striking fac¬
tory workers’ lives. Then she played a key role in the workshop creation of Why
Lord? a play about the experiences of migrant job-seekers: “I suggested that if we
wanted to have a play let’s make it from our own life experiences; we must all con¬
tribute writing. We decided to do something on migration; to show people how it
came about and the problems of migrant workers.”
   This subject matter is one that Malange has again chosen for her poem “I, the
Unemployed,” which she first performed on May Day (Labor Day) in 1985 at the
founding of the Congress of South African Trade Unions at Curries Fountain in
Durban. Malange characteristically takes this opportunity to remind her fellow
unionists of the thousands of desperate, unemployed people whom she embodies
as female, who could not even hope for a union to represent them.
  Malange’s poems are usually written in English; she has been an active member
of the Congress of South African Writers and set up the women’s branch in Natal.
She continues to run writing groups for workers at the Trade Unions’ Bolton Hall
in Durban.
                                                                    M. J. Daymond


                                        ♦

  I’m here
  Living under a Black cloud
  Here, living in thinning light
  Here


390   ♦   1980s
Freedom is nailed to a tree
To die.
Here I am living: in a match box


I am here dying of hunger
And my country is also dying
My children are dying too
Look at them:
How dull their eyes
How slow their walk and the turning
Of their heads
Nothing for them to eat
Can you hear?
They are crying.


I spit at the sun
Shining on me
Blazing everyday
I am waiting for the rain to come
And I cannot plough this beautiful piece of earth.
Here I am: unemployed
I
the unemployed
I am here but invisible.
Preacher man pray for the rain to come


White collars
In your chrome and brown arm-chairs
 Please brighten up this thinning light
 I am appealing to you oppressors
To free
Freedom from the tree.


 My face
 Buried with anger and sorrow
 My stomach
 Filled with hatred and pain
 I behave like a lunatic
 My kids are dying—
 Malnutrition, Kwashiokor
 There is nothing growing here
 And the animals have died.


 All I hear now
 Is the wind at night

                                            I, the Unemployed   ♦   391
      It whirls around
      Spelling the agony of a death
      I’m dying.




                Tsitsi Dangarembga, The LETTER
                             Zimbabwe 1985       English


Tsitsi Dangarembga was born on 14 February 1959 in Mutoko, Eastern Zimbabwe,
to parents belonging to the country’s emergent educated elite. She spent her early
years in England with her parents while they pursued graduate studies. There she
began her schooling, and English became her predominant language. When the
family returned to Zimbabwe in 1969, Dangarembga began to relearn Shona, as she
attended Marymount Mission School in the Mutare area and the private Arundal
School in Salisbury (today Harare). In 1977, she returned to England to study med¬
icine at Cambridge University, only to return after three years to the newly inde¬
pendent Zimbabwe. There she studied psychology at the University of Zimbabwe
in Harare, while working as a copywriter for an advertising agency. She also began
to write and produce plays with the university’s drama club and the theater group
Zambuko. She wrote and produced three plays in a short period.
      Similar experiments with prose writing led to the publication of “The Letter”
in Sweden in 1985. In 1989, after receiving the Commonwealth Prize for Nervous
Conditions, she entered the Deutsche Film und Fernseh Akademie to study film¬
making. Three years later, Neria, a story about the impact of the clashing forces of
tradition and modernity on women’s inheritance rights, was made into a feature
film that won twelve international awards. With the release of Everyone's Child in
1995, Dangarembga became the first black Zimbabwean woman to direct a feature
film. Focusing attention on the quiet desperation and unacknowledged heroism of
two adolescent siblings newly orphaned by HIV-AIDS, the film won several
prizes, including the 1997 award for Best Film by a Black Filmmaker at the Black
International Cinema festival in Berlin.
   Set in South Africa’s apartheid era, “The Letter” is a cross-border text. Yet it
connects on fundamental levels with the author’s later work, establishing early on
the recurrent themes of alienation and its pervasiveness in women’s lives, the lib¬
erating quality of education, and the oppressive nature of ideological systems.
                                                                 Tuzyline Jita Allan


                                         ♦

This morning I received a letter from my husband, the first in twelve years.
Can you imagine such a thing? As has been my custom during all this time
that I have been waiting, I opened my eyes at four o’clock when the first
cock crowed, and lay remembering the day that he left, without bitterness
and without anger or sorrow, simply remembering what it was like to be
with him one day and without him the next.
  At five o’clock I slipped out from under the blankets, softly so as not to

392     ♦   1980s
disturb my children. There is Busi who is thirteen and ought to be sleep¬
ing in a bed of her own now that she is so old and grown into quite a
woman. And there is Thandi who is only five whose father is not my hus¬
band, but a man who comforted me during a few hours of solitude. Busi
and Thandi. They look quite different from each other since neither has
inherited anything of my looks. Busi resembles her father who is tall and
large and black. Thandi also resembles her father who was of medium
complexion and slight build, so you can see that it is impossible to pass
them off as children of the same father. Sometimes, when we meet uncom¬
promising strangers, this is a cause ol concern to me. But on the whole it
is good. Otherwise I might have deceived myself into believing that I am
a more virtuous woman than I actually am.
   As I have said, this morning began in the way that has become usual
since I came back to my village in the homeland, three years after my hus¬
band left us in Sebokeng. I drew water from the tap outside, waiting for
fifteen minutes until the trickle of water that escapes when the tap is
turned on full had filled the drum. (There is a drought this year and the
water pressure is low.) Having filled my drum, I poured a little of the water
into the enamel washing basin and washed myself. Then I heated more
water on the paraffin stove for my mother and daughters. Yes, we are quite
a colony ol women here but we are self-sufficient. My work, teaching in
the village school, pays enough to provide us with food and clothes and the
children are very active, always planting this and that in the vegetable gar¬
den, keeping the house clean and always ready to run errands when I ask
them. Where there is a serious problem, as when Busi was ill and needed
to have her tonsils removed, my brother who is still in Sebokeng, sends us
money to see us through. But such things do not happen often, so really,
my only worry has been the absence of my husband and the anxiety caused
by not knowing where he is or even whether he is alive or dead. This is why
I visit the Post Office everyday.
    Every day of the week, except Sunday, when the Post Office is closed,
I go there to see whether my husband has written. On school days I inquire
briefly, sometimes not even taking time to go inside, but on Saturdays,
 since I go shopping afterwards, I make an occasion of it. I dress myself up
 and even wear some make-up, a little lipstick, but not more since anything
 heavier is out of place in the village and apt to make people stare and whis¬
 per behind my back about my morals. Although I never speak more than a
 few pleasantries to the postmaster, he is kind and sympathetic. He under¬
 stands my preoccupation with the mail because I am not unique       there are
 many families here in the village who have a father, a son, an uncle or a
 nephew who has not been heard of for many years, who has been impris¬
 oned, or who has been reported missing or dead. So you see, although I
 inquired about the mail daily, I did not in fact expect to hear from my hus¬
 band. It was a ritual I performed in order to maintain my bond with the
 past and to let me not forget the necessity of my circumstances.


                                                        The Letter     ♦   393
      Do not misunderstand me. I am not resigning myself to my lot. No,
 indeed, I am glorifying in it. You see, it was painful for me when I lived in
the Township to see my mother wipe the faeces hourly from the plump but¬
tocks of an overfed Boer baby while her children scavenged dustbins in the
shanty town and had no need of the toilet for a week. Nor could I tolerate
watching my father abused for daring to walk over the land of his heritage
without the baas's permission. 1 felt my young brother’s adolescent frustra¬
tion and bitterness when I saw them mutilate each other in gang fights and
I despaired with my uncles and sisters when they were shot down at ran¬
dom by Boer policemen for so much as whispering that there is life after
Botha. Yet we are forced to work for them, in their houses, in their facto¬
ries, their streets and their farms, without self, without soul and without
recourse to justice! My husband and I observed these things together in
Sebokeng. Together we saw the tension that dissects South Africa quite
clearly disclose to us our only course of action—we became political people.
But in my country political black people, which is to say black people, are
threatened with genocide. Therefore it was not long before my husband was
considered a major security risk. Ha! Those Boers! Deploying squadrons of
men, fleets of police cars and rounds of ammunition to capture a single
black man in one little street of decaying ghetto! During the last few days
that my husband was in Sebokeng, we did not live as man and wife because
our house was watched day and night. But my husband escaped by sleeping
in this house one night and that house the next night and so on until
arrangements were finalised for his flight across one of our borders, which
one I am not sure. I have been completely ignorant of his whereabouts since
that day except for the usual rumours that begin with those of us who occa¬
sionally travel into Zimbabwe, Lesotho, Mozambique and Botswana, but
which are impossible to confirm.
   So imagine my surprise when I saw the postmaster waiting for me at
the post office door this morning with a letter in his hand. Feel how my
heart stopped when he gave me the letter and I recognised the writing
immediately. Consider how my hand shook and the sweat trickled from my
armpits in a dark patch down the sides of my dress as I took the letter from
him. Do not think me rude when I tell you that I did not respond to his
greeting or smile at him or thank him for his concern. To tell you the truth
I did not see him or the Post Office or even the letter. All I saw was the
writing, the familiar style with the t s crossed so heavily, and occupying
my field of vision, dominating all else.
      A few minutes later I returned to a more normal state of consciousness
to find myself wandering through the stores (which really are no more than
tuck-shops and kiosks), the letter still in my hand begging attention. In my
happiness I wanted no considerate acquaintances inquiring whether my
news was good news or bad. But my joy would express itself in spite of my
caution and I laughed ouf loud as I walked alone. But there were only a few
people about, intent on their own business with no time to spare to take


394    ♦   1980s
any notice of me. I wanted to hug my mother, to kiss Busi and throw
Thandi into the air and catch her as I used to do when she was a baby.
Instead I forced myself to walk even more slowly than usual and as I
walked, I recited to myself the names of each pupil in my class in order to
restore some balance to my mind.
   By the time I arrived home I was sober once more. All I wanted now was
to slip into the bedroom to read my letter not only once or twice but sev¬
eral hundred times, over and over again without stopping. Only when I saw
my mother taking the sun in front of the house did I remember that I was
still holding the letter for all to see. “You have a letter,” she observed in a
tone that told me that she knew my letter was from Themba. My first self¬
ish instinct was to lie, but my mother had accepted my pain over these
twelve years as her own and in this way had helped me to bear it with
courage, even when it was at its worst. Therefore I went and sat beside her
and, glowing as though I had performed some wonderful feat, told her that
finally Themba had written. For the first time I examined the letter.
    “Look, Mother,” I said, “it has a South African stamp! He must have
given it to someone to post inside the country. And look at the postmark.
It is dated Monday. It arrived here really quickly!”
    Mother was silent while I chattered on and on. When I eventually ran
out of details and description she said, “After all these years. Perhaps it is
good, but I find it strange.” I paid no attention to her words, concerned as
I was only with what Themba had to say. At last in my bedroom I opened
the letter, and then, holding it in my hand, a single page closely written
with hardly any space between the words or lines, I found I could not read
it. Perhaps he had returned to South Africa and had been captured and
imprisoned and they had forced him to write this letter, dictating every
word, as a final insult. Or it was possible (no, probable!) that he had settled
down with some other woman and was happy and secure in a new family. I
 glanced at the first few lines. “My dear wife” I read. (Wife! Wife! I am still
 his wife!) “I am in Botswana at present.” (Botswana! Botswana! Near
 enough to visit!) My suspicions allayed, I read on. He asked me why I had
 not replied to his other letters and I wept with the injustice of it if I had
 only known where he was I would have written him a thousand letters! He
 told me that I should go to him in Botswana if it were at all possible, but
 that I would have to arrange the journey myself since he could not commu¬
 nicate freely with me. I should bring Busi. I should regard it as a permanent
 move. I sank into depression. What would I do with Thandit I could not
 leave her. As I re-read the letter I began to wonder if our reunion was truly
 possible. Would my husband allow me to take Thandi into our new home?
 Or perhaps with the knowledge that I had had a child with another man he
 would no longer want me. Worried by such thoughts I sat down immedi¬
 ately to write to Themba explaining my apprehension. Of course I wanted
 to post the letter as soon as I had finished writing it, but by the time I was
 ready it was late afternoon with the Post Office closed until Monday.

                                                         The Letter      ♦   395
      I would have liked to have remained there in my dim bedroom a while
longer, recreating for myself the contentment and satisfaction of my mar¬
riage in defiance of the loneliness I had contained through the years. What
a luxury it would have been to allow myself the comfort of such memories.
I could not afford it. Instead I turned my mind to practical matters—what
would we eat for the evening meal? Hiding the letter under the mattress, I
went into the kitchen. “Now that you have read your letter you should
destroy it,” my mother said as soon as she saw me. Of course she was right,
but I was not yet capable of such an action. Perhaps tomorrow when I had
read the letter a few more times and could remember every word of it, I
would be able to do so. But now the thought of it lying there under my
mattress gave me back the hope that I had clung to and renewed my faith
in the future.
    “It is a personal letter,” I told her, not looking at her because I did not
believe myself. “There can be no danger.”
   After the evening meal the last traces of my excitement left me too
energetic to rest. I began to clean the house, the kitchen, the living room
and the two small bedrooms, scrubbing and polishing recesses that previ¬
ously I had hardly noticed, cleaning windows and tidying cupboards. Busi
and Thandi helped me for a while, but soon grew sleepy and went to bed.
Although my mother usually retires early, this evening she would not leave
me. Consequently we were both in the living room, I working, my mother
watching me and dozing from time to time, when the army jeep crawled
up our narrow driveway and stopped outside the front door, lights suddenly
blazing into the room through the open window. Ha! Those Boers! An
armed vehicle and six camouflaged soldiers to arrest one small woman in a
remote homeland village! Searching the house, it did not take them long
to find my letters and decide that they were subversive. I was bundled into
the jeep and brought here to the police station.
   I will not tell you how they threatened to shoot my children to make
me confess to my terrorist activities, nor will I tell you how they beat my
mother when she pleaded for me. As for myself, well, I have already told
you that I became a political person twelve years' ago in the township.
Therefore I have had ample time to get used to the aberrations of people
in the grip of totalitarian fervour. I do not know what is going to happen
to me. I may be charged with an act of treason plotted in Pretoria, or they
may hold me here to abuse me physically and mentally for a while before
conceding that my desire to be with my husband is not grounds for indict¬
ment. Whatever happens I know that they will make sure that we cannot
reach Themba, but this is not my concern since I have told you my story,
not to arouse your pity, but only so that you may know that these things
are happening to us in our country.

                          *




396   ♦   1980s
             Ingrid de Kok, OUR SHARPEVILLE
                          South Africa 1987       English


Ingrid de Kok spent her childhood in the mining town of Stilfontein, near
Johannesburg. In her three published collections of poems, Familiar Ground
(1988), Transfer (1997), and Terrestrial Things (2002), she writes often about chil¬
dren scarred by emotional and physical violence in a society riven by inequality.
“Our Sharpeville,” like other poems of De Kok’s about her Stilfontein years, probes
the sensitivity of a child who is made complicit in the injustices perpetrated by her
adult protectors in the name of her own safety, even while she feels drawn toward
the forbidden world her own community excludes.
   The massacre ol sixty-nine black people by white policemen at Sharpeville (a
township in the mining belt around Johannesburg) on 21 March 1960 was one of
the defining moments of the South African liberation struggle. The people who
were shot at Sharpeville on that day were taking part in a series of national protests
against the pass laws. The political significance of the events at Sharpeville was not
something that the young child at the center of Ingrid de Kok’s poem could have
recognized. The child in the poem, like so many of the children of apartheid’s ben¬
eficiaries, lives inside a cocoon of protective adult strategies designed to keep the
brutal political actions of their leaders, and the human misery they produce, far out
ot sight and consciousness. “Our Sharpeville is less a poem about this one histori¬
cal event than a depiction of the entrapment of a child by the adult values that gov¬
ern her life, the dreadful bargain with the devil of adult love that every child makes
in order to honor her parents and their vision of who she is, what she ought to be.
                                                                          Karen Press


                                          ♦


   I was playing hopscotch on the slate
   when the miners roared past in lorries,
   their arms raised, signals at a crossing,
   their chanting foreign and familiar,
   like the call and answer of road gangs
   across the veld, building hot arteries
   from the heart of the Transvaal mine.


   I ran to the gate to watch them pass.
   And it seemed like a great caravan
    moving across the desert to an oasis
    I remembered from my Sunday-school book:
    olive trees, a deep jade pool,
    men resting in clusters after a long journey,
    the danger of the mission still around them,


                                                         Our Sharpeville       ♦   397
      and night falling, its silver stars just like the ones
      you got for remembering your Bible texts.


      Then my grandmother called from behind the front door,
      her voice a stiff broom over the steps:
      “Come inside; they do things to little girls.”


      For it was noon, and there was no jade pool.
      Instead, a pool of blood that already had a living name
      and grew like a shadow as the day lengthened.
      The dead, buried in voices that reached even my gate,
      the chanting men on the ambushed trucks,
      these were not heroes in my town,
      but maulers of children,
      doing things that had to remain nameless.
      And our Sharpeville was this fearful thing
      that might tempt us across the well-swept streets.

      If I had turned I would have seen
      brocade curtains drawn tightly across sheer net ones,
      known there were eyes behind both,
      heard the dogs pacing in the locked yard next door.
      But, walking backwards, all I felt was shame,
      at being a girl, at having been found at the gate,
      at having heard my grandmother lie
      and at the fear her lie might be true.
      Walking backwards, called back,
      I returned to the closed rooms, home.




                               Di//xao =Oma,
      Our Government Is a Glowing Ember
                            Namibia 1988      Ju/’hoansi


This piece of political oratory was spoken by a Ju/’hoan San woman in the Nyae
Nyae area of northeastern Namibia in 1988. Di//xao =Oma is a community repre¬
sentative of the Nyae Nyae Farmers’ Cooperative (NNFC), a people’s self-help group
that, through its ceaseless and effective activism, has come to be recognized as the
 traditional authority” of the area under the independent government of Namibia.
Di//xao is the sister of the first chairperson of the NNFC,Tsamkxao =Oma, and also
the sister of the cooperative’s present manager, Kxao Moses =Oma. She is one of two
representatives from her community, /Aotcha, and has traveled to a large number of
local, national, and international meetings in that capacity.


398    ♦   1980s
  In 1988, however, news of the implementation of United Nations Resolution
435 for free elections and independence in Namibia startled her and other Ju/’hoan
leaders into a quick realization of the magnitude of possible changes. Apartheid
practices of the South West African Administration, under the internationally ille¬
gal mandate of South Africa, had long held the Ju/’hoansi and other Namibians of
color in political paralysis. When the United Nations finally acted, members of the
NNFC went on the road throughout their extensive, remote area, bringing the
news of the international peace talks respecting Namibia, held in Brazzaville, to
far-flung communities, none of which at that time had a radio.
   Di//xao spoke at the southernmost Nyae Nyae community, N=ama, inside a
grass hut while a sandstorm raged outside. Perhaps twenty people crowded into the
small space with eyes tightly shut against the blowing sand. As with speeches by
other representatives, Di//xao’s speech hinged on making bridges between tradi¬
tional understandings and the newer challenges brought by the rapidly changing
political ground rules in pre-independence Namibia.
   Di//xao’s speech reflects the inventiveness sparked by that era among Namibian
San, a kind of verbal creativity that helped make the future seem lively and possi¬
ble to these people. Yet in her speech we hear that the old technology of related¬
ness to land and long-tenured lifeways was still the basic model. It is clear that the
treasured n!ore system of land stewardship, part of the social and environmental
technology that stood the Ju/’hoansi in good stead for so many years, was still alive
in their hearts and minds.
                                                                        Megan Biesele


                                          ♦

When they say, “You people have no government,” we say our old, old peo¬
ple gave us our government, and it was a glowing ember to start a new fire.
I know this place where my fathers and mothers gave birth to me and
 nourished me and I grew up to be like I am. But we don’t know where
 these Afrikaaners were born or who their fathers were: where are their
 fathers’ and mothers’ n!ores? What do these people know about carrying
 embers to start a new fire? Have they ever picked up an ember and gone
 forward with it? We say, “Don t hold us back: we want to lift ourselves up.
 We have our own talk: it isn’t other people’s talk. Long ago when we went
 to our new camps, we brought embers from our old camps. When has this
 government ever come to us with an ember?

                                     Transcribed and translated by Megan Biesele




                              Our Government        Is a Glowing Ember         ♦   399
            Mavis Smallberg, FOR WlLLY NYATHELE
                             South Africa 1988      English


 Born in Cape Town, Mavis Smallberg grew up and lived on the Cape Flats. After
 training as a teacher, she taught physical education, creative dance, and English in
 both primary and secondary schools in Cape Town. In 1996 she left teaching to
 pursue her interests in historical and cultural research, and—after being appointed
 artist-in-residence on Robben Island—began working full time in Robben Island
Museum’s Heritage Department. She was a testimony summary writer for the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission. She is also a founding member of a
recently established women’s creative initiative called Women’s Education and
Artistic Voice Expression (WEAVE), based in Cape Town.
      As a charter member of the Cultural Organization of South African Women
(COSAW), Smallberg participated in numerous creative writing workshops for
youth, worker, and women’s organizations and during the 1980s performed her
poetry at community events.
      In For Willy Nyathele,” originally published in Women Speak, Smallberg re-creates
in poetic form a news report from the Weekend Argus of 25 August 1986 about a
twelve-year-old boy whose political activism was inspired by racial discrimination,
repeated arrests by the state security forces, and the poverty of township life in
Tumahole Location, Parys, Orange Free State. Willy is a child of the 1980s, a time of
continual clashes between the police and the United Democratic Front, of mass rent
boycotts, boycotts of white-owned shops and shopping centers, “necklace” murders,
and police murders of political activists inside and outside prison.
      Children witnessed and sometimes participated in this violence, and were both
politicized and traumatized by it. Disillusioned by what they read as adult ineffec¬
tualness, gangs of youths regarded themselves as the eyes and the ears of the com¬
munity. The news report to which Smallberg is responding notes that these youths
saw themselves protecting the township residents against vigilantes working with
white Administration Board officials, but it also makes a simpler point: The boy
wanted “from the bottom of his heart To eat and eat ^nd eat!’ He was tired of
being hungry.”
                                                                     V. M. Sisi Maqagi


                                           ♦

   First the face, and then
   the caption caught my eye:
   Small Boy Seen As
   Threat To State Security

   The face is oval
   the cheekbones high
   the mouth a generous curve

400     ♦   1980s
and then,
those eyes
The eyes are almond-shaped
with wrinkles underneath:
the eyes show largely white:
the expression in those
serious sullen eyes
is a danger to the state!


A small boy should not have such eyes
eyes which glower, two black coals
smouldering on the page:
eyes which cannot seem to smile
eyes unfathomable
filled with hate, or tinged
with fear?
eyes which look as it they’ve
never known a tear
a small boy should not have
such eyes


A small boy should not be
detained
A small boy should not be
in jail
Not once,
not thrice,
not four times in a row!
A small boy should not be shut
into a cell
so that he can break
a small boy should not be
a danger to the state!


And yet
the small boy knows the slogans
knows he has to fight
a system which pays his mother
R60.00 per month
The small boy fights against grown men who
pose as “vigilantes”
The small boy
frowns when comrades drink
getting drunk inside shebeens
The small boy

                                        For Willy Nyathele   ♦   401
      with a hundred others who call
      themselves “the fourteens”
      run the place—Tumahole,
      a township in the Free State
      This small boy
      just released from
      Heilbron prison in Parys


      But right now
      the small boy only wants
      “to eat and eat and eat”
      he fidgets in his chair and says:
      “white children sit in chairs
      like these.”
      The small boy talks about
      democracy
   and says his brushes with the state
   have only made him “stubborn”
   This small boy
      this Willy Nyathele
   who with his brothers three
   live on salt and porridge
      and who, together with his sister,
      often hungry goes to sleep,
   this small boy knows his fate
   and wants his country
   free


   Ah, woe betide our fate
   that such
   a small boy
   is a danger to the state!




                    Agnes Sam, JESUS Is INDIAN
                            South Africa 1989      English


Agnes Sam is best known for her collection of short stories Jesus Is Indian, and is one
of a small but growing number of South African women writers of Indian descent.
Sam claims that she became a writer out of a deep sense of frustration as an exile liv¬
ing in the United Kingdom. Born in Port Elizabeth in 1942, Sam left South Africa
to attend university in neighboring Lesotho, then moved to Zimbabwe and Zambia
where she taught science. She arrived in the United Kingdom in 1973; here her
experiences of attempting to take a further degree while supporting her three chil-


402     ♦   1980s
dren, and at the same time struggling to publish her writing, convinced her that this
was an inhospitable climate for black women writers like herself.
   Sam has since returned to South Africa, but her written works all date from her
time in the United Kingdom. These include two radio plays, poems, and short stories
published in Kunapipi between 1982 and 1988. Jesus Is Indian was published in the
United Kingdom in 1989. The humor and subtlety of Sam’s depiction of a child’s cul¬
tural negotiations, with both the power invested in English and the authority of her
community’s customs, indicate why the story included here continues to be important
in post-apartheid South Africa.
                                                                    Miki Flockemann


                                          ♦

(Who invented school? Who said little children must sit still in a desk pre¬
tending they wide awake when they dreaming of comics and swings and
stealing fruit from Mrs Mumble?)
   (Me, I’m not a good girl, but I’m even praying for the bell to ring,
frighten even to look at Sonnyboy standing behind Sister, moving every
way Sister moves and making monkey faces behind her back. You know
me, once I start to laugh, I won’t never stop.)
  (You can’t blame Sonnyboy. It’s Sister’s veil and skirt and things. It
makes so Sister can’t see what’s going on right behind her. Jesus, Mary and
Joseph, every time Sister look like she’s turning round, I think I’m going
to faint. Won’t we all be in big trouble if Sister catch him? Of course yes.
Even when we sitting still!)
   (Here’s Sister turning around—and easy as you like. Sonnyboy make
like he’s picking up his pencil. Poor Sister’s puffed out. And she’s not fin¬
ished cleaning the board. Anyone can see Sister’s new. Our old teacher
make each one have a turn cleaning the board.)
  (Now Sister’s saying, No copying from the blackboard. I got to ask her why.)
  “Sister, why lately Sister keep saying, No copying from the blackboard today?”
    (Sister says she wants we must write from up here—she’s tapping her head.)
   “Then why Sister keep on changing every word we write?”
    (Sister says she wants we must write like she writes.)
   “But why?”
   (Sister don’t want me must ask so many questions.)
   (The way Sister wipe the board you think she’s waving to a train to stop
and there’s someone lying on the train lines! Now look at us! We all look
like we got dandruff. And just hear how Cissies coughing! But you know
it’s Cissies own fault. Why she want to sit right under Sister’s nose? Like
 she never talk in class and make jokes. Goody-gum-drops!)
    (Before Sister turn round again I better make like I’m working hard.
Maybe she’ll go worry someone else. I know a good trick from last year.
You fall over your desk like you sleeping and put your head on your arm so
no-one can see your page, like when you doing a test and no-one must
 copy off you, then the teacher thinks you working hard. I just got to hide

                                                          Jesus Is Indian     ♦   403
my one line of story or Sister will know I been playing. From up here in
my head is coming a story about Honey.)
      Me an Honey fight like tigers . . .
      (Here’s Sister like a ghost by my elbow. She says she wants to read my
story so far. She got her red pen out.)
   “Honey and I, Angelina! . . .”
   “Yes, Sister.”
   (Hama always say you got to respect the nuns. Because they don’t get mar¬
ried. But Hama don’t say why they don’t get married. Sister’s standing by Edie
now. She’s a good girl. She don’t swear. And she don’t talk back to Sister.)
   Honey and I fight like tigers. Scratching. Biting. Spitting. Kicking. Pinching.
Pulling hair. Hama tie . . .
   (Sister’s back!)
   “Mother tied, Angelina! . . .”
   “Yes, Sister.”
   . . . Hama tied Honey and I’s arms together . . .
   “Mother tied our arms, Angelina! . . .”
   “Yes, Sister.”
  . . . Hama tied our arms together. Me an Honey pinch with the other hand. . .
   “We pinch each other with our free hands, Angelina!”
   “Yes, Sister.”
      We pinch each other with our free hands. We scream. Like tokoloshe bite us .. .
      “Tokloshe?”
  “Don’t Sister even know what’s a tokoloshe? It’s like a . . . like a little . . .
something people can’t see ... It comes in the night . . . like a spook ... to
bite little children.”
  “As if a vampire bat bit us, Angelina! . . .”
  “Yes, Sister.”
  ... as if a .. .
  “Vampire . . . Angelina . . . v-a-m-p-i-r-e.”
  . . . bit us. Then Hama tie . . .
  “Then mother tied, Angelina! . . .”
  “Yes, Sister.”
  . . . Hama tied me an Honey’s arms to the table leg . . .
  “Then mother tied our arms, Angelina! . . .”
  “Yes, Sister.”
  . . . Hama tied our arms to the table leg, arms touching . . .
  “. . . with our arms touching . . .”
  “Yes, Sister.”
  . . . with our arms touching. Hama say . . .
  “Mother says, Angelina! . . .”
  “Yes, Sister.”
  . . . Hama says it’s a sin for sisters to fight! What Hama know? Hama think
Honey’s so sweet...         '
  “What does mother know? Mother thinks Honey is so sweet. You are a


404     ♦   1980s
very stubborn child, Angelina . .
   (Sister’s floating away like a ghost. You can only hear the beads. I wait
till she’s at the far end of the class.)
  “Sister, are people vampires when we drink the body and blood on
Sunday?”
   (I got to hold my mouth with my two hands so I don’t burst out laugh¬
ing the way Sister shouting me for being cheeky.)
   (This Sister Bonaventura! She make me so sick and tired I ever hear this
word school! I never say I want to come to school. Why I’m wasting my time?
. . . Sitting here? . . . Writing a story? . . . When my poor Hama can’t even
read English? And everytime I do a clean page—with neat handwriting—and
no crossing out—this Sister come and spoil it with red marks! All over my
clean page! Mother says this—and mother says that!)
   (Edie’s whispering behind her hand to me, Sh! Sister got powerful ears.)
   (I’m looking at Sister’s back like I can shoot poison arrows into her.
Lucky for me Sister’s looking somewhere else.)
   Hama forget Honey and me under the table. Me an Honey fall asleep. We
wake up good friends. Hapa say, no wind can blow between too-good-to-be-true
friends like me and Honey.
   Even when we fight in the week, Honey and me become best of friends every
Saturday. Saturdays the day we go to town alone.
   Alone? The busybodies put their hands to their mouths—open their eyes
wide—talking behind their hands. Me and Honey don’t take notice. We got no
money. But we come home an tell Hama what dresses we see. Hama cut. And
Hama sew. Then Hama fit. Hama put pins in us. But me and Honey don’t even
say, “Ouch!” Just in case Hama stop sewing. We say, It don’t hurt, Hama. So we
get ragamuffin sleeves. Sweetheart necklines. Peter Pan collars. Then we show-
ing off Swaying our hips with new dresses not bought from town.
   One Saturday/ me and Honey coming from town, we see a boy standing out¬
side his father's shop. Just a ordinary boy. Short hair cut. No moustache. All the
Indian boys we know wear moustaches. So this one looks handsome. Honey and
me know him. Only we never talk to him. On Sundays he bring his Hama to
visit our Hama. Only he has to sit in the car and we must stay in the house. I
say to this boy, “Hello! You look busy. ” Honey say I’m forward. The boy get shy
because Honey standing far away like he got yellow fever. Then Honey start to
walk away and I must run after her or the busybodies think he’s my boyfriend.
   Honey say she will tell Hama. Even Hapa. I say, what you will tell, Honey?
I never stand and kiss the boy! Ooh! Honey s so shocked! She make like I commit
mortal sin just to say this word “kiss.” I say why you don’t come in the shop? She
say she will come in next time, if he’s not my boyfriend. But he is my boyfriend,
Honey. He can’t be a girlfriend. Honey say I don’t know what’s a boyfriend.
   Next Saturday Honey says she ll bring a book for the boy to read. But first we
got a haircut.
   From the day me and Honey can talk we begging Hama to cut our hair. I
don’t know why Hama must ask the big people what to do. They say Indian gv Is


                                                        Jesus   Is Indian   ♦   405
must keep hair long. Me and Honey ask, Why ? Why Indian girls must keep hair
long like a monkey’s tail? First the big people say little girls must listen to their
elders. Then when Honey and me say we getting to be big girls they say, "It’s got
to do with religion!” What religion Hama? We not Hindu girls. Why we must
keep our hair long? Hama say electric light children ask too many questions!
Long hair take too long to dry, Hama! Say there’s no sun, me and Honey can’t
wash our hair. Hama can see we right, but Hama say the big people will say we
got no respect. Lucky for us Honey get headaches. When Hama take her to the
doctor, guess what he say? He say Honey’s hair is too heavy for her head! He tell
Hama to cut Honey’s hair. I don't get headaches, but I cry like someone in the
family just died the whole time Hama cut Honey’s hair till Hama say I bring
bad luck. So Hama cut my hair too.
   Every busybody's shocked! Shame! Such beautiful hair! Behind Hama’s back
they saying, “These Christian girls! They got no shame!” But Honey and me, we
showing off. In front of all those one-plait Indian girls. Swinging our heads.
Page boy hair style. Like Veronica Lake.
   “Angie! Here Sister’s coming again,” Edie’s warning me.
   (Sister’s standing a long time behind my desk reading my story.)
   (Sister says to leave out words that are not English.)
   “Why Sister?”
   “Because I don’t know them, Angelina.”
   “I can teach you Sister. Is easy.”
   (Sister’s whispering to me just like we do when we’re not supposed to
talk in class. Then there she goes gliding away.)
   “What she say?” Edie asks.
   “Sister say she never come to learn. She come to teach!”
   (This Sister Bonaventura! Walking with her nose in the air! One day the
rain will fall in.)
   Now every Saturday Honey and me come from town, we go to the boy’s shop.
His shop’s not busy. Me and Honey just stand and chat to him about what’s
showing at the bioscope. He gives us free Coca-Cola.
   One night we looking in the long mirror and Honey say she’s taller than me.
I say, "It’s your hair Honey. Standing like a bush on top. And don’t stand on your
toes. ” But Honey turn sideways and pull her stomach in and stick her chest out.
"You look like them pigeons in the park, Honey. Why you stand like that?’’
Honey say I’m jealous. "Jealous of what, Honey?” She say I don't even know!
  And then guess what? Hama say not to stand on the stoep at night. Not to
play in the street any more. Why Hama? A drunk man coming pass? Hama say
electric light children got no respect for their elders.
   Hama say we mustn't talk to boys. And Hama say I must tell her if Honey get
a boyfriend. We got no boyfriends, Hama. What we want to do with boyfriends?
Hama must learn to trust us. We only want to go to parties. Do the Charleston!
The Jitterbug! Foxtrot with Victor Sylvester. Hama says, “No!” Honey and me
cant go to no parties. Only* if Hama is there. We only can go to weddings, engage¬
ments and christening parties. But why Hama? Hama want to dance too? Hama


406   ♦   1980s
swing round and slap Honey’s face. I got under the table in time. Honey’s crying
and asking why Hama always hit the one near to her. Honey, why you never
learn to do like I do? I always move slowly away before I answer Hama back.
   From under the table I ask Hama how Honey and me will meet a husband?
Honey and me won't meet a husband in church. “You can’t talk in church,
Hama!” Hama want us to be nuns? Like Sister Bonaventura? “We can’t eat
curry and rice in the convent, Hama! What's the use you teach us cooking? Hey,
Hama?” Hama say Hama will choose a husband for us. Like Hapa.
   But Hapa drink too much. And Hapa waste all the money for food on drink.
Now Hama’s trying to hit me under the table with the feather duster. Hama say,
“Who tell you such lies?” “Hama you say so when you fight with Hapa. ” Hama
say she'll take some chilli powder and wash my mouth out! Hama say electric
light children know too much.
   I got another question to ask Sister.
   “Sister? Why Sister don’t just sit down and read the paper like a real
teacher?”
   (I can’t say all the things Sister is saying now. Only remember, Sister
don’t like you must ask questions.)
   “Sorry Sister.”
   (I’m standing in front of the class smiling at my pals and making like
I’m the teacher, while Sister’s going down the rows. Everybody’s scared
even to look at me! Now I won’t finish my story about Honey. Why this
Sister can’t leave me alone to do my writing? Why she must get cross when
a person ask a simple question? Good job the bell’s ringing. Everyone’s
running round the class putting things away.)
   (Sister wants me must finish my story for homework.)
   “Yes Sister.”
   (Writing at home is better. There’s no stopping every five minutes for
Sister’s red pen. And you can listen to the wireless same time.)
   Suddenly Honey’s putting on high heel shoes. I run to tell Hama. Hama say
it’s all right. But no talking to boys! “Can I put high heel shoes on, Hama?”
 “Why not? What about lipstick then, Hama?” Hama just favour Honey. Hama
want Honey must get a husband and I must stay at home till Im a old maid.
   Now Honey don’t want me to come in the bathroom with her. Even when
she's not having a bath. Why Honey? We always bath together. Why you special,
suddenly? Honey say shes a young girl. “I’m also a young girl, Honey. How can
I be a old lady?” Honey’s laughing at me.
   On Sunday when Hama’s washing the rice and I m stamping garlic and gin¬
ger I ask Hama, “Why we didn’t stay in India, Hama? Why Hama want us to
speak our language, but Sister Bonaventura want I must leave out Indian
words?” Now Hama say she don’t want us to go to school anymore. Hama
thought Sister Bonaventura is teaching us our language.
   (I don’t like this Sister Bonaventura, but I rather go to school than stay
at home and do cooking and housework with Hama. Now I’m sorry I told
Hama about Sister teaching us English in school.)


                                                       Jesus Is Indian   ♦   407
      “You want no-one must understand us when we want to make friends,
Hama? Hama! Ouch Hama!" Hama still want to beat us? But we growing big
now! I leave the stamper and stand by the kitchen door, ready to run into the
yard. Hama will beat us when we are big married women? Hama says, “Yes.”
And if we don’t get married? Hama says she will beat us harder! But Hapa
never beat Honey and me! “I’ll run away from home, Hama. ’’Hama say she will
catch me when I come in for supper.
   Now guess what? Honey say I mustn’t come with her to the boy’s shop any
more. “Why Honey? He’s my boyfriend too. He’s not only your boyfriend!”
   Honey say I don't know what's a boyfriend! “What then? What’s a boyfriend?
What a boyfriend do? Don’t laugh Honey, don't laugh! Sister say my English
better than yours. What a boyfriend do? Kiss? He kiss you? When? Why I never
      G)i)
see?
   Never mind. I won’t go with Honey if she don’t want me. If Hama and Hapa
find out, Honey don’t blame me! I got no friends now. Hama’s not worried about me,
only Honey. Honey don’t like me. And the boy don't like me too. Maybe I’ll run away.
   Honey got a nerve! She say I must wait for her outside the shop. Keep a look
out. In case the busybodies come pass. What she doing in the shop? Just talking
to the boy over the counter. Big romance! He was my boyfriend first. I don’t like
Honey any more.
   (I never have time to finish my story at home because I have to help
Hama in the kitchen. Sister’s checking our homework. It’s my turn. I close
my eyes and say my prayers. All of a sudden Sister shut my book and throw
it into a corner of the room.)
   (Sister say, “This is a very bad story about a very bad girl.”)
   “Sister?”
   (Sister say I heard her.)
   “I was praying Sister, I never heard you.”
   (Sister ask why I never tell Hama Honey was meeting a boyfriend.)
   “He’s not Honey’s boyfriend, Sister. He’s my boyfriend. I saw him first.”
   “Angelina!”
   “Sister?”
   (Sister’s banging her flat hand on the table. She ldok really mad. I look at
my friends in the class. Then I go to stand outside the classroom. Sister comes
out. There’s Sister marching away to the office. And I’m trying to catch her.)
   (Sister want to write a note to Hama. She ask what’s my mother’s name.)
   I say, “Kamatchee.”
   Sister ask, “What’s your mother’s Christian name?”
   “Hama got no other name Sister. Only Kamatchee, Sister.”
   Sister make like she don’t hear me. She ask again, “What’s your mother’s
Christian name?”
   “Kamatchee, Sister.”
   Sister’s        laughing.   She   say, “Little   Cabbage?   Little   Cabbage? Your
mother’s name is Little Cabbage?”
   “No, Sister. Hama’s name is Kamatchee.”


408          ♦   1980s
  (Sister say she will write a note to Little Cabbage if I don’t tell her
Hama’s Christian name.)
  “Sister Bonaventura, why you can’t learn to say Hama’s name? Why you
say ‘Little Cabbage,’ ‘Little Cabbage,’ ‘Little Cabbage’? Hama’s name is
Kamatchee. Say Kamatchee. Go on, Sister. Say ‘Ka-ma-chee.’”
  (Ooh! The way Sister’s going on. Like the Sermon on the Mount.)
  “Sorry Sister. Hama never told me is a sin for a Christian to have a
Hindu name.”
  (Jesus, Mary and Joseph, rather send me a book for Christmas with all
the Christian names so I don’t give my children a Hindu name by mistake.
I don’t want my poor children must die and go to hell for damn nation.)
  (It I tell Hama Sister chased me away from school, Hama will be glad
because she don’t want me to learn English. Anyway, now I got time to lie
in bed and I can finish my story and not worry about that Sister Bonaventura
and her red pen.)
  I knew it! Honey’s been found out. She think she can go alone into the shop
every Saturday afternoon and talk to the boy and the busybodies wont talk?
Now she’s going to get a hiding. The boy’s in the front room. With his Hama and
Hapa. Their car is parked outside. All the children in the street climbing all over
the car. And Honey’s hiding in the kitchen.
   I told you, Honey. It’s okay to speak to a boyfriend when you a good girl like
me but not when Hama say you can’t stand on the stoep at night.
   Honey says I told Hama. I didn’t! How can I do such a thing? Didn’t I visit
the boy too before Honey got big ideas about him? I thought Honey want to hit
me, but she's standing there shivering. “Honey I never told Hama. True as God.
Must be the busybodies. ”
   Hama’s in the kitchen with us. Hama want us to make tea. Honey don’t want
to take the tray inside. But I’m not frightened of the big people.
   The boy’s there. All dressed up. He never come in before. Always drops his
mother and comes to pick her up. His Hama and Hapa are there too. All dressed
up in Sunday clothes. One auntie and one uncle are smiling, smiling, smiling,
all the time I pass the tea around. But Hama and Hapa look very suspicious.
  Just when I want to put a cup on the side table my eyes catch a small gold
tray. Looks like a nutmeg, turmeric sticks and some leaves on the tray. I look at
Hama and Hapa. They don’t look comfortable.
   I go back to the kitchen to tell Honey what they doing. Hama comes in. Hama
goes up to Honey and begins pinching Honey’s cheek, like she’s playing, but also
like she’s cross. “Whatyou been up to, hey?” Honey says, “Nothing Hama, noth¬
ing.” Now I’m getting scared. I say, “It wasn’t Honey’s fault, Hama. It’s my
fault. Don’t hit Honey.” I pull Honey away from Hama and try to get Honey
under the table. But Honey’s like she’s stuck. And Hama don’t stop. She keep ask¬
ing Honey the same question, “What you been up to, hey?”—till Honey burst
into tears. Then I burst into tears.
   Then Hama laugh. Just in time. Hama say they come to ask for Honey to marry
the boy. Lucky I never tell Hama about going to the boys shop on Saturdays.


                                                        Jesus Is Indian    ♦   409
   (Jesus, Mary and Joseph, forgive me for being so selfish. Thinking about
my children going to heaven and forgetting about my poor Hama. Rather
don’t give me that book for Christmas. Rather tell me how my poor Hama
will go to heaven if she got a Hindu name? Must I give up chocolates for
Lent? Or boyfriends?)
  “Hama, why you didn’t get a Christian name when Father baptised you?”
   (Hama say if she’s a Christian and her name is           Kamatchee then
Kamatchee is a Christian name.)
   (Honestly! This Hama got a answer for everything. Maybe she should
go to Sister’s school. She will learn better than me.)
  “But Hama, Sister say you won’t go to heaven. Because you got a Hindu name.”
   Hama laugh. Hama holds her head up high and makes it wobble about.
She say, “ What that sister know? Hey? Don’t Jesus wear a dhoti like Gandhi?
Don’t Hama talk to Jesus in our language? Don’t Jesus answer all Hama’s
prayers? Don’t Honey get a rich husband? You so clever, what you think that
means? Hey? You electric light children and you don’t know? Jesus is Indian.
You go to school and tell that Sister.”
   (Jesus, Mary and Joseph, never mind what I said before about the book
with Christian names. First I want to go to town to do window shopping
before I tell you what to get me for Christmas.)
   (Hama never get the letter from Sister, so I go to school to say Fm sorry.
For three days Sister don’t want me to come in the class. So I stand by the
door all day. On the third day Sister say I can come inside.)
  (Now Sister’s come to mark my story to see if I take out the boyfriend.
But I left it in. Because the boyfriend is going to marry Honey. Then Sister
ask me in front of the whole class what’s this Indian word doing in my
English story? Every page got this Indian word two or three times even.
Sister say I’m stubborn like a mule.)
  (So I stand up in front of the whole class and I tell Sister I never going
to call Hama “mother.” Even when Fm writing English in my book. Sister
can say mother for Sister’s mother. I say Hama for my Hama. Because
Hama say Jesus is Indian because Jesus wear a dhoti and Jesus can under¬
stand our language.)
  (I know the busybodies going to hear about this and say I got no respect
for a holy servant of God. And I’m waiting for Sister to send me home
again. And then Sister say, “All right Angelina.” And everyone is turning
to look at me. And now I’m swinging my page boy haircut, and pulling in
my stomach and pushing out my chest when I walk home from school.)




410   ♦   1980s
             Mekulu Muk'ivahongo Ester Kamati,
                     Children of Namibia
                          Namibia 1989        uuKwanyama


Mekulu Ester Kamati has played with words since she was about ten years old. She
weaves her poetry around traditional forms, her own independent thoughts, and
what she observes in the world. As she comments on her own art, “To create a poem
has no specific time. Writing a poem is like a game wherever you are, you always feel
like playing that game.” She started by elaborating on and reciting the traditional
names of great chiefs and kings. Her musical style captivates her audience. While she
has had very little formal education, she is gifted with an inquiring mind. Her work
has remained firmly in the realm of orature for, as she says, “My mind is my book.”
She wishes to see her poetry passed on in a printed form for future generations.
   Kamati lives in a village in northern Namibia and is renowned as an oral poet.
Her talent is highly valued and she is frequently invited to perform at weddings or
birthday parties. She commemorates days of national importance with her cere¬
monial poems, composing and performing “Children of Namibia” for instance to
celebrate the return of Namibia’s exiles in 1989 when the many thousands who had
fled the war were finally reunited with their families and congregations.
   Kamati’s child, like so many others, went into exile. As a mother, she experi¬
enced the agony of not knowing where her child was, whether she was dead or
alive. In 1989, approximately 45,000 Namibians were repatriated, most of them
returning to their rural homes in northern Namibia. Even though not all returned,
the overwhelming joy of witnessing the children ot Namibia return is perfectly
expressed in Kamati’s words of praise and welcome.
                                     Kaleni Hiyalwa and Fredricka Ndeshi Immanuel


                                          ♦
   Children of Namibia
   you returned
   calves with no horns
   left in the kraal
   howling like hyenas
   faces and mouths pointed northwards
   welcome friends
   you returned gracefully


   Children of Namibia
   like a joke we see you
   like a dream we look at you
   your faces were not visible in this land
   your shadows were seen in death.



                                                  Children    of Namibia ♦         411
      Children of Namibia
      your mothers mourned
      mourned for you with hot tears


      Though true they died
      those of them
      who came home
      to fight for their land
      hunted like antelopes
      and summer springboks
  with broken legs
      though true they died


      Children of Namibia
  your mothers mourned you
      mourned you with hot tears
      no bed was without drops of tears
      no pillow was without mucus


  Welcome, you’ve returned
  gracefully, we have waited for you
  we welcome you
  we rejoice for your return


  Let us shake hands
  in strong friendship
  and love from God
  in the lord’s scars
  that have united us


  Parents of Namibia
  we have blown off tears
  and wiped off mucus
  but now our tears
  have turned into happiness
  our cries as parents
  have resulted in jubilation
  though not all returned
  we say thank God
  for bringing along a nation.


                    Translated by Kaleni Hiyalwa and Fredricka Ndeshi Immanuel

                              \




412     ♦   1980s
     Gcina Mhlophe, PRAISE TO OUR MOTHERS
                           South Africa 1989       English


This praise poem was performed in 1989 when Gcina Mhlophe first met
Nokukhanya Luthuli, wife of Chief Albert Luthuli. He was president-general of
the African National Congress (ANC) during the 1950s and Nobel Peace Prize
winner in 1961.
   Nokukhanya was born into the Bhengu family in 1904 at the Umngeni American
Board Mission near Inanda, outside Durban. Both her parents valued the book-edu¬
cation that the missionaries offered and named their daughter Nokukhanya (Mother
of Light) in the hope that she would share their values. Nokukhanya went to school
at the Ohlange Institute, founded by Rev. John Dube, and later to the Inanda
Seminary. There, because her father had remarried and was no longer willing to sup¬
port her, she had to do domestic chores in the school in order to pay her fees. She
studied further at Adams College, and in her last year there she met Albert Luthuli,
who taught her in Zulu and in school organization classes. They were married four
years later. The regulations against married women teachers compelled Nokukhanya
to become a wife and mother who remained at home, but she did not allow herself
to be confined or inactive. Besides caring for their seven children, she supplemented
her husband’s meager salary by growing and selling vegetables, and later her profits
enabled her to begin farming sugar on their land at Groutville, on the coast north of
Durban. As she acquired cattle and extended her crops, her neighbors expressed
their admiration by saying, “She’s not a woman, she’s a man!”
   Nokukhanya’s support of her husband’s ideals demanded great fortitude in coping
with political intimidation. From 1961 to 1966 she had to spend six months of the
year alone in Swaziland looking after the farms that had been purchased with some
of the Nobel Peace Prize money. These farms served as a shelter for ANC members
escaping from South Africa. After her husband’s death in 1967, Nokukhanya contin¬
ued her modest, active life; at her eightieth birthday celebrations, her speech focused
on women’s part in the struggle for liberation. At the age of eighty-five, she joined a
freedom march in the nearby town of Stanger and the following year (1990) she
attended the huge rally in Durban to welcome Nelson Mandela on his release from jail.
He introduced her to the crowd as “Nokukhanya Luthuli... the mother of the nation.”
   Nokukhanya’s national maternal role is the focus that Gcina Mhlophe chooses
for her poem. She says that performing it on the afternoon in 1989 when she met
her icon “was my most important performance ever.” Mhlophe was born in 1960
in Hammarsdale, KwaZulu-Natal. Her name [NokuJGcina means “the last child
in a large family. She was sent to school in the Eastern Cape and began writing in
Xhosa, turning to English much later. In 1986 her play Have You Seen Zandile? was
performed at the Market Theatre, Johannesburg, where, in the early 1990s, she was
the first black resident director. Mhlophe has also published short stories, poems,
and stories for children. In recent years she has worked on television but her chief
focus is the performance of traditional folktales for children in order to teach them
about their cultural heritage.
                                                                       M. J. Daymond


                                               Praise to Our Mothers           *   413
                                            ♦


  If the moon were to shine tonight
  To light up my face and show off my proud form
  With beads around my neck and shells in my hair
  And a soft easy flowing dress with the colours of Africa


      If I were to stand on top of a hill
  And raise my voice in praise
  Of the women of my country
  Who have worked throughout their lives
  Not for themselves, but for the very life of all Africans
  Who would I sing my praises to?
  I could quote all the names
  Yes, but where do I begin?!


  Do I begin with the ones
  Who gave their lives
  So that we others may live a better life
  The Lilian Ngoyis, the Victoria Mxenges
  The Ruth Firsts
  Or the ones who have lost their men
  To Robben Island and their children to exile
  But carried on fighting
  The MaMotsoaledis, the MaSisulus
  The Winnie Mandelas?


  Or maybe I would sing praises to
  The ones who have had the resilience
  And cunning of a desert cobra
  Priscilla Jana, Fatima Meer, Beauty Mkhize
  Or the ones who turned deserts into green vegetable gardens
  From which our people can eat
  Mamphela Ramphele, Ellen Khuzwayo


  Or would the names of the women
  Who marched, suffered solitary confinement
  and house arrests
  Helen Joseph, Amina Cachalia, Sonya Bunting, Dorothy Nyembe,
  Thoko Mngoma, Florence Matomela, Bertha Mkhize,
  How many more names come to mind
  As I remember the Defiance Campaign
  The fights against Beer Halls that suck the strength of our men
  Building of alternative schools away from Bantu Education
  And the fight against pass laws


414     ♦   1980s
   Maybe, maybe, I would choose a name
   Just one special name that spells out light
   That of Mama Nokukhanya Luthuli
   Maybe if I were to call out her name
   From the top of the hill
   While the moon is shining bright;
   No—Ku—Kha—nya!
   NO—KU—KHA—NYA!!!
   Maybe my voice would be carried by the wind
   To reach all the other women
   Whose names are not often mentioned
   The ones who sell oranges and potatoes
   So their children can eat and learn
   The ones who scrub floors and polish executive desktops
   In towering office blocks
   While the city sleeps
   The ones who work in overcrowded hospitals
   Saving lives, cleaning bullet wounds and delivering new babies
   And the ones who have given up
   Their places of comfort and the protection of their skin colour
   Marian Sparg, Sheena Duncan,
   Barbara Hogan, Jenny Schreiner.
   And what of the women who are stranded in the homelands
   With a baby in the belly and a baby on the back
   While their men are sweating in the bowels of the earth?


   May the lives of all these women
   Be celebrated and made to shine
   When I cry out Mama Nokukhanya’s name
   NO—KU—KHA—NYA!!!
   And we who are young, salute our mothers
   Who have given us
   The heritage of their Queendom!!!




          Joan Hambidge,            T.M.T. ■ T.B.M.G.
                        South Africa 1989      Afrikaans

Joan Hambidge, born in 1956 in South Africa, is currently an associate professor
in the Department of Southern African Languages and Linguistics at the
University of Cape Town. To date, she has published sixteen collections of poetry,
the first of which appeared in 1985. She has also published an academic text on
postmodernism, three satirical works featuring the gay heroine, Sonja Verbeek, and
one semiautobiographical novel—the first in Afrikaans to explore in some detail


                                                   T.M.T. T T.B.M.G.      ♦   415
the development of a homosexual Afrikaans girl. Her latest collections of poetry
are Lykdigte (2000), which contains poems in both English and Afrikaans, and a
collection of poems translated into English entitled Wheel of Fire (2002). The
poem reprinted here, “T.M.T. T T.B.M.G.,” was first published in Hambidge’s
seventh collection, Kriptonomie (1989).
   Hambidge’s poetry is typically personal and self-reflexive, with critiques of
South African society and male domination occurring surreptitiously and addi¬
tionally to contemplation of the nature of poetry itself. “T.M.T. T T.B.M.G.” is an
example of the way in which Hambidge’s consideration of a love affair comes to
incorporate the nature of poetry and writing. Writing becomes a means of coping
with a relationship while simultaneously writing it into being.
                                                                  Chandre Carstens


                                        ♦

   T.M.T. S? T.B.M.G.*
  There is more to life
   than patterns: boy meets girl,
  buying a Sterns ring, et cetera.
  There is more to love
   than a beginning, middle or end.
   Because you (and I) refuse to accept.


   Oh the first encounter (shall we say: exposition)
   runs over ever swiftly into the high point
   (that is to say: the climax or consummation,
   the cumbersomeless cum). Both: entrapped.


  Who wants to guess the rest?
   For that which goes up, must come down.
   Ecstasies last only as long as the flowersending
   or Romance’s sweet forgery lasts.
  Denouement, informs the glossary, an “unknotting
  of complications.” A discovery that passion
  —for one? Perhaps both?—is running out.
  With us the denouement: the discovery of your treachery.

  There is more to love
   than patterns: girl meets girl,
  invests in love, togetherness, understanding.
  There is more to love
  than a beginning, middle or end.
  Because you (and I) become caught up in symbols.

  *There is more to love than boy meets girl
                                                 Translated by Chandre Carstens


416   ♦   1980s
1990s   AND   2000s
\




    A
                Zoe Wicomb, ANOTHER STORY
                              South Africa 1990   English


According to the received ideas of apartheid, Zoe Wicomb would have been called
a coloured writer. Usually inserted between quotation marks or qualified by “so-
called, the term is sometimes seen to indicate an uncertain or “in-between” iden¬
tity, but is also sometimes claimed to define a distinctive cultural group. The term
remains an uncomfortable one in post-apartheid society, and its complexity is the
topic of much of Wicomb’s writing, including her short stories in You Cant Get
Lost in Cape Town and her novel David's Story, as well as numerous essays in liter¬
ary and cultural criticism.
   “Another Story” is, in part, a response to Sarah Gertrude Millin’s novel God's
Stepchildren (1924), which speaks of colouredness as “nothing but an untidiness on
God’s earth—a mixture of degenerate brown peoples, rotten with sickness, an
affront against Nature.” Well-received in its time in both South Africa and espe¬
cially the United States, God’s Stepchildren tells of four generations descended from
a white missionary and a Khoi woman. The characters aspire to whiteness, but the
“flaw” of their blood is passed on with each generation until Barry Lindsell realizes
that he belongs with the “brown people” and abandons his chance to be integrated
into white society. In “Another Story,” Wicomb offers a conscious alternative to
Millin’s conclusions.
   While Wicomb currently lives in Scotland, her fictional interests are South
African even after thirty years of self-imposed exile. She left for England in 1970,
returning for brief family visits and a longer period in the early 1990s to teach at
the University of the Western Cape (where she had been an undergraduate). Born
in 1948, she grew up in a small Afrikaans-speaking Griqua settlement in Namaqua-
land, Northern Cape. She now teaches at the University of Strathclyde in Glasgow.
                                                                       Mary Watson


                                          ♦

Approaching D. F. Malan airport. The view from the window on the right,
that is, as you enter the aircraft: it falls out of the blue, suddenly, even with
your eyes fixed on the ground rising towards you—a perfect miniature
plane, a razor-edged shadow in the last of the sunlight, earthborne, yet fly¬
ing alongside where before there had been nothing. And then it grows.
Because the sun is low and because nothing, no nothing will remain a lit¬
tle toy-thing. (A darling little toy-thing, but that sort of word has no place
here and must be excised.) Yes, flying across the earth, it gradually grows
larger. Still wonderful while its outline remains sharp, until an ungainly
leap in size when overblown, with edges grown soft and arrowed wings
blunted, the once-lovely little thing spreads and is swallowed. A simple
multiplication and division sum, a working out of velocity, height, angle of


                                                        Another Story        ♦   419
the sun etc. could have foreseen that moment. But she didn’t. Or perhaps
couldn’t. So that was that. And the plane landed with the usual bump and
the ping of the pilot’s intercom.
   To tell the truth, Miss Kleinhans was scared. And Dollies voice as she
leaned over the wild with morning-glory fence rang in her ears.
   “If you asking my advice Deborah Kleinhans, I say stay right here where
you belong. You not young, man, and there’s no need to go gallivanting
after family you don’t know from Adam. I mean, family is now family, but
the whole point is that family is family because you know them. It’s not a
stranger who gets to know you through ink and how-do-you-do on paper.
And remember Cape Town is full of troubles with people throwing stones
and getting shot. And what with you being a stranger in Town. Have you
listened to the wireless today?”
    Deborah’s head spun in an attempt to work out how knowing or not
knowing blood relations affected the claims that such people could legiti¬
mately make on her, for she had come to see the visit as a duty. Also, the
morning-glory trumpets had started yawning and she watched the first
fold up neatly, spiralling into a tight spear that betrayed nothing of its ful¬
some blue.
  “Dollie, this thing will take some thinking about. But it’s too cold out
here for me.” She had not asked for Dollies advice; she had merely spoken
of her indecision. But if only she had listened to Doll who was after all a
sensible person, a neighbour she could rely on, even if that husband of hers
was a good-for-nothing dronklap. I should have been a spinster like you,
hey, Dollie sometimes said in exasperation, but Deborah could tell how the
word spinster cut into her heart, for Doll would swirl the remains of her
coffee and gulp down the lot as she rose with just that hint of hoarseness
in her voice, I’ll have to go and get ready the old man’s bredie. Or his socks,
or boots, or ironing, and even she, the spinster, knew that that was not the
worst a woman had to do. She who had worked for years in white house¬
holds knew more about things than people thought.
   There had been two letters. The first simply a matter of introduction. A
certain Miss Sarah Lindse from a wayward branch had traced her, a great-
aunt, wishing to check the family connection and with Old Testament pre¬
cision had untangled the lines of begetting into a neat tree which Deborah
found hard to follow. Coloured people didn’t have much schooling in her
day but she knew her Bible and there was no better education in the world
than knowing the Bible from cover to cover. Still, enough names on those
heavy branches looked familiar, although so many children, dear Lord, why
ever did her people have so many children. Family tree! It was a thicket, a
blooming forest in which the grandest of persons would get lost. And she
pursed her mouth fastidiously; she had a lot to be thankful for.
  There were times when you had to face the truth; times like this when
you’d made a wrong decision and the good Lord allowed you the opportu¬
nity to say, I have been guided by vanity. And in the same breath she found


420   ♦   1990s AND 2000s
her vindication: for a woman who had worked as a respectable housekeeper
all her life, but in service all the same, the connection with this grand young
woman was only what she deserved. A history teacher at the university in
Cape Town. The drop of white blood, no doubt, and she sighed as she
thought of that blood, pink and thin and pure trouble. Ag, that was a long
time ago and now she had a niece, a lovely girl who was educated and rich
and who wrote in the second letter, I’ll send you a plane ticket. Come and
have a holiday in Cape Town. To her, an old woman whom the child had
never even met. And Deborah, who had been timid all her life, who had
kept her feet firmly on the ground and kept her eyes modestly fixed on
those feet, for once looked up to see the serpent of adventure wink through
the foliage of the family tree. And she was undone. And at her age too, but
she replied, keeping to the lines of her Croxley pad with a steady hand,
although these modern pens behaved as if light upward strokes and bold
downward strokes were the last thing they hoped to achieve: I have always
wanted to fly and would like to look around Cape Town. But I don’t need a
holiday so you can save up the darning and mending and of course I could
do the cooking while you get on with bookwork. Thank you for the offer.
   It was also that nonsense of Dollies. She had managed to think it
through and it simply did not make sense. Family is family and the whole
point of such an unnecessary statement was that you didn’t have to know
the person. Vanity again: she had proven her ability to reason things out
for herself and in showing off to Dollie had brought upon herself this busi¬
ness—this anxiety.
    If only she had someone to talk to on the flight. Silence was something
still when you were on your own but here with a flesh and blood person sit¬
ting right by your side, the silence fidgets between you, monitors your
breathing, stiffens the body and makes you fearful of moving. So many new
things cannot become part of you unless you could say to the person sit¬
ting right there, My what a business this is, without of course letting on
that you’ve never flown before. But the red-faced woman next to her had
swung round to the aisle as if she, Deborah Kleinhans, freshly bathed and
in her best crimplene two-piece, as if she had b.o. Ag, it’s the way of the
world, she consoled herself, these whites don’t know how to work things
out, can’t even run their own blooming homes. If she were in charge she’d
have Apartheid to serve the decent and god-fearing—that was a more sen¬
sible basis for separating the sheep from the goats, but she sighed, for how
would one know, how could one tell the virtuous from the hypocrites, the
pharisees. These days people grew more and more like jackals and the edu¬
cation business only helped to cover up sorcery and fornication.
  And here Miss Kleinhans felt once more a twinge of regret, a tugging at
her intestines which happily could be diverted from the new niece to the
wonderful South African Airways lunch. All nicely separated in little com¬
partments that Dollie could well be alerted to, her with the eternal bredies,
day after day everything mixed together, meat, potatoes, tinned peas and veg


                                                    Another Story      *   421
and then, on the plate, that man of hers would stir in the rice, pounding, as
if it were mortar to be shovelled into the cracks of his soul. But it would ve
been nice just to say to the red-faced woman, Isn’t it oulik these little brown
dishes like housie-housie things. Last time I flew they were orange you
know. Just in case. And she lifted her head high; no one could accuse her of
being ignorant, green and verskrik as a young farm-girl. The Goodlord she
felt sure would forgive her. Especially after the temptation, the terrible desire
to put one in her bag, only the little SAA pudding dish of cream and brown
plastic and with the white woman’s back virtually turned to her, nothing
could be easier. But she didn’t. And she praised Dearjesus who resisted forty
days in the Wilderness and felt sure that He would not expect her to fast just
because He had, not on this her first flight with food so prettily packed.
  That was before she thought of the order of eating. She knew that one
did not just start any old where you liked. Her de Villiers household always
had fish or soup to begin with but how was she to determine the order of
things that in fact were the same. A test that would have made the woman,
if her back had not mercifully been turned, giggle at her ignorance, for
there in the little compartments was tomato and lettuce alone and again
tomato and lettuce with meat, and how was she to decide which came first.
More than likely the two halves of the same tomato turned into different
names on different plates, which only went to show how silly all this blink¬
ing business was, but she was grateful all the same for the disdain of the
woman who had swung round into the aisle. At what point was she to eat
the round bread? Only poor people, her father had always said, ate bread
with their dinner, so she would look upon it as a test, like in the fairy tale
of a round red apple or something to tempt and catch the heroine out.
Why else would the two large black berries have been hidden under the
lettuce? She would have arranged it on top to set oft the green and red; she
had always paid attention to presenting food attractively and Mrs de
Villiers never had anything but praise for her dishes.
   The pip of the foul-tasting berry proved yet another trap. How was she
to get the damned thing out of her mouth and back on to the plate? Would
she have to pretend that she was not hungry, that she could only just pick
at her food? What nonsense, she admonished herself. This was no boiled
sweet destined to dissolve; she could not very well keep a pip hidden in her
cheek until god knows when, so she spat it into a paper napkin under cover
of wiping her mouth, and niftily tucked it into her sleeve. There was no one
watching her; she would tuck in and not waste the poor girl’s money; this
food—never mind if it didn’t live up to the cute containers—was expensive
and, what’s more, paid for. How could she, a grown person, be so silly and
she chuckled audibly so that the red-faced woman took the opportunity to
adjust her discomfort, to straighten her spine and allow herself ten degrees
that would bring Miss Kleinhans’s fork just within her line of vision.
   The girl must have been relying on a family resemblance; why else had she
not suggested ways of identifying herself. Perhaps she should wave a white


422   ♦   1990s and 2000s
handkerchief or something. That was what people did in Root Rose, which
only went to show that Rooi Rose then was not for people like her. She could
never do such a thing, make a spectacle of herself. It must have been the flight
through high air that made her think such unusual thoughts. As if she had
taken a feather duster to her head so that those stories, she now clearly saw,
were for white people. Which did not mean that she couldn’t read them: she
was used to wearing white people’s clothes and eating their leftovers, so what
difference did it make reading their stories. As long as she knew and did not
expect to behave like a Rooi Rose woman. It was difficult enough just sitting
there, waiting, with so many idle eyes roving about. She lifted her head to
concentrate on the lights flashing their instructions about smoking and seat-
belts until they finally clicked off, the messages exhausted, and felt herself
adrift midst empty seats and the purposeful shuffling of people anxious to go.
   Deborah looked about and caught sight of the red-faced woman who
flashed her a warm smile. What on earth could the person mean? She was
not to be lured by a smile of falsehood, here where there was no danger of
striking up a conversation. As far as she was concerned it just was too bladdy
late. Haai, what a cheek, but then, not keeping track of things, a smile leaked
from her lips all the same and she had no choice but to incline her head to
nod a greeting.
  The usual Cape Town wind awaited her, just as Dollie had said, and
Deborah smoothed her skirt and patted her head to check that the doekie
was still in place. Crossing that space was not simply a question of putting
one foot before another. The tarmac felt sticky underfoot; the wind snapped
like a mongrel; and her ankles wobbled unreliably above the Sunday shoes.
Ahead, through the glass, a tinted crowd waited, waved, and what would she
do if the girl was not there? That she could not allow herself to think about.
The Goodlord would provide. Although the Goodlord so often got His
messages mixed up, like telephone party-lines, so that good fortune would
rain into the unsuspecting lap of that heathenish husband of Dollies, when
it was she, Deborah Kleinhans, who had spent the holy hours on arthritic
knees, praying. If red-face walking purposefully just ahead of her was expect¬
ing no one, you could be sure that some thoughtful niece on the spur of the
moment had decided to meet her after all, while she, a stranger in this town
. . . But this time, and Deborah was careful to smile inwardly, this time, He
got it just right.


Sarah was confident that she would recognise her great-aunt by the family
resemblance and indeed the woman walking unsteadily across the tarmac
could be no other than Deborah Kleinhans. Who, incidentally, was the
only elderly Coloured woman on the flight. Sarah corrected herself: so-
called Coloured, for she did not think that the qualifier should be reserved
for speech. It grieved her that she so often had to haul up the “so-called”
from some distant recess where it slunk around with foul terms like half-
caste and half-breed and she stamped her foot (which had gone to sleep in


                                                    Another Story       ♦   423
the long wait) as if to shake down the unsummoned words. Lexical vigi¬
lance was a matter of mental hygiene: a regular rethinking of words in
common use, like cleaning out rotten food from the back of a refrigerator
where no one expects food to rot and poison the rest.
  The old woman was stronger, sturdier than she imagined, with the pos¬
ture of someone much younger. But she was tugging at the navy-blue suit
which had got nipped, or so it seemed, by her roll-on, so that her hem-line
dipped severely to the right. Also, threatening to slip off, was the doekie
which had to be hauled back over the grey head as she struggled with a
carrier-bag in the wind. But they met without difficulty.
   “So we found each other. Something to be grateful for these days when
you lose and search for things that disappear under your very nose . . .”
  “And people going missing by the dozens,” Sarah interjected. Deborah
looked alarmed. Whatever was the child talking about; not her, she had to
get back home; Dollie would be expecting her in precisely one week.
   “Ag, they say big cities swallow you up but we’re old enough to look after
ourselves. Dollie’s people,” she added, “even in Kimberley, you know, after the
riots. Clean disappeared. But one never knows with these children. Dollie is
now Mrs Lategan who’s been my neighbour for twenty years.” Then she
chuckled, “But what if we are not the people we think we are, or no, that’s not
what I mean. Let’s sit down child, I get so deurmekaar and I need to take a
good look at you.” They sat down and looked at each other surrounded by
squeals and hugs and arm-waving reunions. In the two pairs of eyes, the
flecked hazel eyes derived from the same sockets of a long dead European
missionary, there was nothing to report. The improbable eyes, set generations
ago into brown faces, betrayed nothing, as eyes rarely do, but both claimed to
read in the other signs and traces so that they held each other as firmly as the
rough and wrinkled hand gripped the young and smooth. Deborah wondered
for the first time why the girl had brought her all that way. Sarah thought of
her father who in his last years had kept a miscellany of rare physical com¬
plaints. A man who knew his viscera like the back of his hand and could iden¬
tify a feeling of discomfort with self-claimed accuracy—his liver, or pancreas,
or lower section of the colon—an unnecessary refinement since the remedy of
Buchu Essence served them all. She hoped that her great-aunt would not get
ill; those were surely the eyes of a hypochondriac.
  The girl was rather disappointing: untidily dressed in denim without a
dash of lipstick to brighten her up. There was something impenetrable about
her face, a density of the flesh that thwarted Deborah who prided herself on
looking right into the souls of strangers. Also, her car was not at all what
Deborah had expected but then she did not think any car smart except for a
black one. The house that they pulled up at was very nice, but modest, she
thought, for a learned person. With so much rain here in Cape Town it
seemed a pity not to have a proper garden. Just a little patch of untrimmed
grass and a line of flowers sagging against the wall. Yellow and orange
marigolds, their heads like torches, so that she turned to look back at the


424   ♦   1990s and 2000s
dark mountain and saw the last light gathered in the flaming peak of a cloud.
  The medicinal scent of marigolds followed them into the house.
Through the passage lined with old photographs. So many people with
nothing better to do than stand around and wait for the click of a camera.
And right into the kitchen until the marigolds submitted to the smell of
coffee. From a blue enamel pot like her very own the girl poured large cup¬
fuls and her heart leapt, for city people, she thought, only drank instant
coffee, didn’t have time, Dollie said, for Koffiehuis. Washed in a caffeine-
induced well-being she felt her feet throb all the more painfully so that she
eased off her shoes to find two risen loaves straining under the nylon
stockings. Why feeling good should have reminded her of feeling bad she
did not know, but oh, she felt like a queen being led to her room with a
bowl of hot water in which to soak those feet. But queens get their heads
chopped off, so it was not too surprising that in that dream-wake state as
she rested before dinner, Deborah orbited wildly in a marigold-round, her
eyes chasing the pinpoints of light where orange turned to fire, and her
head threatening to fly off. She rose clutching her throat.
  At table Sarah talked too much. Deborah, used to turning her own
thoughts slowly round, this way and that, and then putting them away safely
for another inspection day, found the girl’s insistent ways too exhausting.
Like Mr de Villiers’s office with rows and rows of narrow drawers packed
with papers—the girl’s head was like that. And she spoke fast, whirring like
a treadle-machine that made her own head, still delicate from dreaming, spin
once again. And all these things from the past, the bad old days that Sarah
wanted to talk about. Stories folded and packed in mothballs right at the
bottom of Deborah’s head. To disturb those was just plain foolish, just ask¬
ing for things to come toppling down.
   “Perhaps later this year I’ll come to Kimberley. To look around all those
places. The old farm, Brakvlei, all those places where the Kleinhanse lived,”
Sarah said.
  But the old woman would not be roused. “Nothing there to see. Not a
Coloured person left in those parts. You won’t find a riempie or a rusty
nail. No, it’s years since I left and soon after that the others trekked. The
drought, you know. Girlie, this is a lovely bobotie. I haven’t had any for so
long; being on your own you can’t really make such elaborate food.”
   The girl was not a bad cook. And the bobotie was good although Deborah
liked it just a little bit sweeter. Just a spoonful of apricot jam to set off the
sharpness of the dried apricots. That’s what she liked about bobotie—the
layers, different things packed on top of each other. She always did it in a
pyrex dish so that you could see the separate layers of curried mince, apricots
and then the thick custard just trying to trickle down to the dried fruit.
Almost a pity to eat it.
  “No really,” she said through slipping dentures, “there’s nothing like a
good bobotie. Bananas are also good you know, but to contrast with the
custard, apricot is best.”


                                                      Another Story       ♦   425
      In the tall, frosted glass of Fanta, the orange bubbles broke merrily at
the brim, almost too pretty to drink. On the same principle Deborah’s
good clothes remained unworn at the back of the cupboard, but today, in
her Sunday wear, eating and drinking the beauty of it all, her old heart was
content and this Sarah was a girl to be proud of. She would bring Dollie
along next time; my, what a time they would have.
      Then Sarah said in a preacher’s voice, “. . . nothing but an untidiness on
God’s earth—a mixture of degenerate brown peoples, rotten with sickness,
an affront against Nature ... So that was the farm.”
      They had slipped into comfortable Afrikaans, a relief to Deborah whose
English pinched like the Lycra roll-on that Dollie insisted had to be worn for
the visit. And now the girl had switched to English once again so that she
groped and grunted, for syllables from the two languages flew to each other to
make wild words; because she did not understand about the sickness and death
and because she felt a great weariness, a cloud settling around her head. The
girl was surely mad. Everybody gets sick and dies, but Brakvlei was never rot¬
ten. Oh no, theirs was the cleanest of farmyards, the stony veld swept for hun¬
dreds of yards and even the fowls knew not to shit near the house. In that swept
yard a young man rested his brown arms on the latched lower door, leant well
into the dark but spotless kitchen with the sun behind him lighting the outline
of his tightly curled hair. And Deborah, sick with shyness, packed more wood
into the full stove and felt her hem a hot hoop below her knees, for she had out¬
grown that dress, and she had never been looked at in that way. Even when he
offered to cleave a log that refused to go into the stove, his eyes burned and then
her Pa came, to see his favourite daughter, his miracle late-lamb, younger than
the grandchild, tug at her skirt and he ordered Andries away. That day she tore
the dress into rags and braved a beating for she knew that a strip of plain cot¬
ton could simply have been sewn on to lengthen the skirt. But a beating has
never done anyone any harm and she could thank her Pa now for sitting here
where the girl’s strong hands came to rest on her shoulders.
  “Auntie feeling alright? Perhaps a drop of Buchu Essence?” she inquired,
once again in Afrikaans.
  “No, Pm alright. Just put a little bit of bobotie on my plate.” Then
Deborah remembered the libel. “Cleanliness is next to godliness. That’s
what my mother always said. And it was my job every morning to sweep all
around the house. Really, it was just re-arranging the veld, making our own
patterns of earth and stone with the grass broom, but Ma said, The veld will
swallow us up if we don’t sweep. No, you can ask anyone; Brakvlei was the
tidiest little place you’ve ever seen. If your people thought otherwise, well,
then they just don’t know what tidy means. All my life I have kept that
motto: Tidiness is next to godliness.” And then her anger subsided: her
mother would not have quoted the adage in English as she just had, not at
home. What had she in fact said? How unreliable words were, lodging
themselves comfortably ir\ the memory where they pretended to have a
rightful place. Deborah did not hold her memory responsible.


426     ♦   1990s and 2000s
  “No, no,” Sarah soothed, “I’m sure you’re right. I have no doubt that
Brakvlei was well kept. But I wasn’t really talking of Brakvlei; it was just
something I remembered. From a story.” But the young woman’s eyes burned
so brightly, so busy-bodily, oh Deborah just knew that passion for probing
deep into other people’s affairs. Who did this child think she was, wanting
to pry into her life and she who had never said a word to anyone about
Andries, the tall young man whom she saw just once more before her father
waving the old shotgun told him not to set foot in that swept yard again.
  “People come and go and in the end it’s no bad thing. No point in
brooding over things that happened a long time ago. I haven’t got time for
those old stories,” she said firmly.
  “A pity really; it’s an interesting story that needs to be told by . . .”
  “And what would you know about it?” Deborah interrupted, “It’s never
been interesting. Dreary as dung it was, sitting day after day waiting for
something to happen; listening for hooves or the roll of cartwheels.” But
she checked herself. Hearing only the wind howl through the bushes and
the ewes bleat, she had made up stories. Of driving through streets lined
with white-washed houses; of friends, girls in frilled print frocks who
whispered secrets under the breath of the wind; and of Andries on horse¬
back galloping across the swept yard right up to the kitchen door. But she
said, “You know I have my books—Rooi Rose every fortnight, I haven’t
missed a book since I started working for the de Villiers and when I retired
I kept it up. Every fortnight. Good stories that seem to be about real life,
but well, when you think about it, you won’t recognise anyone you know.
They’ll give you no useful tips. They’re no better than the nonsense I used
to make up in my own head to kill the time. My advice child is to stick to
your business and forget about stories of old times.”
  “It depends surely on who tells the story. Auntie Deborah, that’s what I
must ask you about. Do you know if someone has written the story of our
family, from the beginning, right from the European missionary? Do you
by any chance remember a woman, a white woman speaking to your
mother or brothers or yourself about those days? A woman who then wrote
a book? Have you ever heard of the book, of. . .”
   “No, I don’t believe it. What nonsense, of course there was no such
woman. A book for all to read with our dirty washing spread out on snow
white pages! Ag, man, don’t worry; it wouldn’t be our story; it’s everyone’s
story. All Coloured people have the same old story.” And then Deborah
slumped in her chair.
   Sarah knew it, just her luck, the old woman travelling all this way to put
down her head and die at her table. She held a bottle of brandy to the life¬
less lips. The eyelids fluttered and Deborah sat up with remarkable agility
as if the laying of her head on the table had been a deliberate gesture of
exasperation.
  “Just tired child. Don’t worry I’m not going to die here; I’ll die respec¬
tably in my own house and that not for some time yet.


                                                   Another Story      ♦   427
      Sarah helped her to bed. “Tomorrow evening,” she said, as she tucked her
in, “I have to go to a meeting. But in the morning we’ll go out. Somewhere
exciting but let’s talk about that tomorrow.”
      “To the Gardens girlie; that’s where one should go first. I’ve heard so
much about the Gardens in Cape Town. Where the fine ladies parade.”
And she giggled for she knew it could not be as her mother had described
so many years ago. And even then it was a second-hand account, told by
her grown-up sister Elmira whom she had never known.


Deborah was not surprised by the knock. Her heart had swollen, filling her
chest with a thunderous beat and rocking her entire body as she heard the
footsteps steal past her window, round to the back of the house. Skollies
with armfuls of stones, just as Dollie had warned her. Then a low, barking
voice—Quick. Here. Slowly, she twisted her head to look at the clock. Then
Deborah leapt out of bed. She would not await death lying prone in her
bed. Oh no, if skollies planned to kill her, well, they would meet her stand¬
ing up straight, ready to meet her Maker. Her hands groped for the dress¬
ing gown but the old arms shook too violently to guide them through the
sleeves. She crept out to the hall; she could at least telephone the police. But
they were already at the door. What kind of cheeky skollies were these who
thought she would open the door to her own death? Why did the girl not
wake up? She pulled on the dressing gown. The knock grew louder and
someone shouted, “Open up; it’s the police.” They had come for Sarah.




Deborah waited for Dollie in the Lategans’ kitchen. Mr Lategan put the
kettle on for coffee, making an elaborate display of not knowing where to
find things, so that she suggested that he put on his shoes while she made
the coffee. That the man should be told to make himself decent, as if she
would divulge a word to someone sitting in his socks. And she thought of
the folly of having expectations, of how she had imagined sitting at that
table with Dollie, telling her story.
  But there they sat drinking the coffee she made and Mr Lategan knew
exactly where to find Dollie’s buttermilk rusks which they dunked. And so
she told him, for she could not expect the man to ask again. About the
police who came for Sarah at five-thirty in the morning, pointing their guns
as if they were in a play on the TV. And how they turned the house upside
down and even looked in her suitcase. But they were very polite, especially
the big one in command who apologised nicely and said to her, “You should
have kept an eye on the girl,” so that she turned to him triumphantly and
said, “So you don’t know everything like you said you did. I’ve known this
girl for less than a day.” Mr Lategan interrupted to say that if they didn’t
know that, they could so Easily have got the whole thing wrong, the wrong
house, the wrong woman, everything. Which was exactly what Deborah was


428    ♦   1990s AND 2000s
about to say, but it was so nice to be back and because she could have added,
also the wrong Deborah Kleinhans, for she felt as if the story had been
playing on the TV, she allowed him to be the author of the observation.
  There was also Cape Town to tell about even though she knew that he
had been twice. But the city was so big that he could not possibly have been
to the same places and he certainly listened with great interest. Sarah had
written a letter to her neighbours, the Arendses, and even then Deborah
marvelled at the girl’s skill, how she wrote like lightning, her hand flying
across the paper in such straight lines, even though the big policeman leant
over her, checking every word. Busybodies, that’s what they were, going
through people’s things and reading their letters. Mrs Arendse took her to
the Gardens but her heart was not in it. Someone else, a young woman
whose name she could not recall, took her to a museum to see what the girl
called her ancestors. Hottentots in a big glass box, squatting around an unlit
fire of all things, so that she left in disgust. But she said nothing to him of
the large protruding buttocks and the shameful loincloths of animal skin.
No, her heart was not in it and Mrs Arendse arranged an early return flight
for there was no point in waiting to see Sarah again. They telephoned many
times but there was no point, everyone said.
   When Dollie came she told it all again and she did not mind Mr
Lategan sitting there until he tried to correct her. If things were slightly
different the second time round, well she was telling it to someone differ¬
ent and he should have had the decency to keep quiet. So she went, taking
her bag, for she had not yet been home and Dollie shouted after her, “I’ll
come with,” just as she unlocked her door.
  Dollie lay across her bed while she unpacked. The frock for parading in
the Gardens, a bold print of yellow daisies on white, she folded away into
a bottom drawer for the nights were drawing in and really it was perhaps
too bright for someone of her age. And then she told Dollie. Of how she
had offered to make a nice pot of coffee because it was so early and that’s
just what you needed in order to think clearly. If the policemen burst
rudely into the house, well, she was brought up decently. Sarah shouted at
her but she knew how a civilised person should behave. And she paused in
an attempt to trace the moment when things became muddled but all she
recalled was an unmistakable smell of marigold, a weariness and the pre¬
cise timbre of the sergeant’s voice as she finished pouring the coffee: “Milk
and sugar for the other two but just black and bitter for me.” Then with¬
out thinking, without anticipating the violence of the act, Deborah
Kleinhans took each cup in turn and before his very eyes poured the cof¬
fee into the sink. Together they watched the liquid splash, a curiously
transparent brown against the stainless steel.




                                                    Another Story       ♦   429
                Cheche Maseko and Loice Mushore,
                     War from Within
                    Zimbabwe 1990       siNdebele and chiShona


During Zimbabwe’s liberation war, when the two guerrilla armies, the Zimbabwe
African National Liberation Army (ZANLA) and the Zimbabwe People’s Revolu¬
tionary Army (ZIPRA), fought the Rhodesians for the liberation of their country,
rural women endured their own pain with enormous resilience and quiet but deter¬
mined strength of purpose. Mothers of the Revolution includes the stories of thirty
rural women, each in her own way representative of the complex, life-threatening
problems experienced during the long guerrilla war. The two voices below focus on
being a “sell-out,” a terrifying concept used by all three armies. This accusation was
the most frightening and intimidating threat of all, because it was very difficult if
not impossible to refute, and because it was potentially pervasive: Your neighbor
with a personal grudge could accuse you of being a “sell-out.”
      Cheche Maseko’s daughter was accused of supporting the guerrillas. Her pun¬
ishment and death were intended to be exemplary. The community, including her
mother, was required to watch her die. Loice Mushore’s husband was accused of
supporting the Rhodesian forces, and she watched her husband being killed by a
contingent of ZANLA guerrillas.
   These stories are by no means unique but the memories they contain make pal¬
pable the misery and brutality of a war as savage for the civilian population as for
the armed forces. Maseko told her story in siNdebele, and Mushore in chiShona.
                                                                      Irene Staunton


                                         ♦

Cheche Maseko
My early life was very good. I was a very strong, beautiful and proud girl.
I had a big body—someone who could be called fat. I did not have any
friends outside my family. I played with either my sister or my cousin and
I liked doing what I did alone. [. . .]
  But when my father-in-law wrote and told me that my third and
youngest son also wanted to join the struggle, I went to Tsholotsho to see
him. I pleaded with him not to go. I promised to buy him a pair of shoes
that he wanted very much, and promised him that I would do everything
I could for him, if he did not go. In the end he stayed. He really wanted to
go, but he was only about ten years old, and as his two bothers had left, I
did not want him to go.
  The eldest son was fourteen when he left: his brother was twelve. I did
not think they would survive but I prayed to God and I also put snuff on
the ground to appease our ancestral spirits so that they would keep our
children safe. A lot of children died but fortunately mine survived.

430     ♦   1990s and 2000s
    It was my daughter who died during the war and that was a very painful
experience. She died here at home in Siphaziphazi. She was beaten by a big
stick. She was hit hard with a big, big stick as if they were pounding millet.
She was hit hard, and at first she was crying and then she was silent but they
continued hitting her. She was not the only one who was killed that day. The
soldiers came at dawn and took people from different homes and killed them
at the same time in one place. We were ordered not to cry or say anything as
they were being killed. We just sat there, with the old man Mkandla, singing
political songs very low and quietly. They were killed by the soldiers who
said they were collaborating with the freedom fighters. They wanted to use
them as examples to frighten others. Many people were killed but some
managed to run away. Some were badly injured, but survived, after receiving
treatment. After the killings, the villagers were ordered to bury the dead
within a short time and the elders buried them. I was so pained and so weak
that I could not walk to the burial place. Because there was no transport, I
had no means of telling her father, and he only heard about the death of our
daughter some time later.
  After her death, my grandmother wanted to commit suicide but my
uncle stopped her, saying that she was not the only person in the country
who had lost a child in the war. He told her that she should accept it as it
was: what had happened, had happened. He advised her to pray and throw
snuff on the ground. But my grandmother was very, very distressed and she
could not eat for many days and we had to plead with her to do so. My
uncle also grieved, although he knew he had to be strong. He told us that
the children had died for us, had died to free Zimbabwe. We salute those
that died. They are heroes.

Loice Mushore
It was, I think, the following year that the comrades came to Chief
Ruzane’s area and only the year after that, in 1977, that they came into our
area. All the adults in the village were summoned to the headman’s house
and we were told that the comrades had come. We could not see them
clearly at all. Their faces were shadowed by their hats. After that we did
not see them again for some time. But they used to pass through our dis¬
trict about once every two months.
   However, the night after they finally came to stay in this area, they
arrived at my house at around ten p.m. We heard sharp knocks at the door.
My husband and I opened it and they told us to get up and follow them.
We carried a lamp into the kitchen hut. The comrades ordered us to go and
wake the children and then they were ordered to stand outside the kitchen.
My husband and I sat in the kitchen with the comrades. I offered to cook
for them but they refused. I asked if I could light the lamp, and I did. The
comrades then ordered me to go outside. They started to interrogate my
husband. Unfortunately he had always had a stammer and the comrades
interpreted this as an attempt to lie. They accused my husband of being a


                                                 War from Within       ♦   431
sell-out. They alleged that he had spent the day at Chisasike with the sol¬
diers. I heard everything outside and so I stood in the doorway and
demanded to know what they wanted. They refused me entry into the
kitchen. I told the comrades that they were being unreasonable and I
reminded them of what they had promised when they first arrived—that they
would thoroughly investigate each accusation before punishing anyone.
      At that, one of them opened fire on my husband who was seated cross-
legged by the fireplace. The comrade was standing at the doorway. The
comrade fired four shots but they all missed my husband who asked, “Why
do you want to kill me? What have I done?” The comrade did not answer
but aimed his fifth shot. This time the bullet pierced my husband’s neck.
My husband collapsed and I saw blood begin to flow. I could not believe
what was happening.
   The children were then told to move out of the yard and the comrades
set all our rooms alight, including the two granaries and the storeroom,
although they took our wireless and my husband’s special pair of shoes out
of our house first. I just stood there, in the courtyard, with my baby on my
back. I had nothing with which to cover it. The comrades had removed the
baby from the house before they set fire to it, but they did not bring any¬
thing like a blanket with them.
   The comrades then said they wanted to kill our cattle. So I explained
that the cattle were my mother’s. In fact they were mombe dzemaid So, in
darkness, we went to the kraal. When we got there, one of the comrades
said that, no, he didn’t think it was right to shoot the cattle, but others dis¬
agreed with him and they argued amongst themselves. Then they told me
to go and tell the soldiers what had happened. I told them simply that I
would not go, I did not know any boers and I did not understand their rea¬
son for killing my husband. So they went off in one direction and I went
in the other.
   I did not go back to my home, although the fire was dying down. I col¬
lected my children and I went to a friend’s house. I only had on my dress
without a petticoat, headcloth or shoes. I felt terribly confused. The next
day I was treated at the hospital and I stayed there Sfor two weeks. I felt I
was losing my mind. Our neighbours were very kind: they looked after the
children during that time. At the hospital I was given some clothing. After
I was discharged I went back home and I was told by the comrades to go
elsewhere.

    1. Special cow given to a mother as roora [bride-wealth; here a portion given to the
bride’s mother].


                       Transcribed and translated by Margaret Zingani Zingani

                              \




432    ♦   1990s AND 2000s
                 Karen Press, KROTOA’S STORY
                           South Africa 1990       English


Karen Press has published five volumes of poetry, the most recent being Home (2000).
“Krotoa’s Story” first appeared in Bird Heart Stoning the Sea / Krotoa’s Story /Lines of
Force (1990). Short excerpts have appeared in a number of school history textbooks
since 1994.
   The poem had its origins in a children’s story called Krotoa (1990), which Press
published while working as a teacher and materials developer at the South African
Council for Higher Education. The story was part of a broader educational initia¬
tive whose origins lay in the 1976 Soweto uprising, to excavate suppressed histo¬
ries that would tell schoolchildren about colonization and resistance from the
perspective of indigenous South Africans.
   According to Dutch records, a Khoikhoi woman named Krotoa served as an
intermediary and translator between the Dutch East India Company and the
Khoikhoi people, later becoming the wife of a European official. After her hus¬
band’s death, however, the records note that she was accused of drunkenness, her
children were taken away from her, and she was kept a prisoner on Robben Island.
After her death, it was said that she had, “like a dog to its own vomit, returned to
the ways of her people.”
   Press draws on the available documentary evidence, but develops from the bare
outline a lyrical version of Krotoa’s life and death and a speculative psychological
drama. She imagines the strengths and vulnerabilities produced by Krotoa’s
ambiguous position: a young woman inserted by powerful men into a situation of
political maneuvering in which she had no choice. The poem speculates on the ways
in which someone located between conflicting desires and requirements lives—as
both a vulnerable and proactive figure, trapped within and between worlds. The
poem reclaims the complexity of Krotoa’s history from the simplifying footnote she
became in the official records. The epilogue of the poem memorializes Krotoa by
returning her name to her. The version here, for reasons of space, has been cut.
                                                                         Ingrid de Kok


                                           ♦


   I
   I am Krotoa.

   I am the daughter of Maqona.
   My sister is the wife of the great Cochoqua chief, Oedasoa,
   and in his kraal I, Krotoa,
   spend my time with the women of his household.

   When I am older I shall marry one of the sons of the rich men
   amongst us. I have already chosen from them

                                                          Krotoa’s Story        ♦   433
      two whose looks and actions I shall watch
      as they grow older. Then the chief Oedasoa, my brother,
      will arrange the wedding with the one who is bravest
      and most handsome.


      Now I learn the skills
      of basket weaving, shaping pots and finding plants that heal.
      My sister teaches me to plait my hair
      and to make ornaments for my body from copper wire.


      Walking alone through the bushes
      I feel the sun turning my skin to gold
      and the hot wind playing against my legs:
      at such times I know how beautiful I am.


  There are two kinds of people:
      the ones who huddle over the ground
      afraid that their fingers will drop off before the work is done,
      and those who climb trees and cry out
      to see how many birds they can put to flight.


  I know I will not be satisfied
  until I have frightened the black-winged hawk
  off his perch in the high mountains.
  Heitsi-Eibib will bless me, and keep me from danger.




  It was Oedasoa himself who came to call me,
  my sister plaiting my hair in the sun
  next to the old tree, and his shadow fell
  over us suddenly so that we both jumped up
  stood heads bowed before him
  my sister spoke, “what is it, my lord?
  what can I do?” and he, “nothing, nGai,
  it is Krotoa I have come to find”
  my face hot as fire, he has not done this before
  pain dived into my sister’s eyes and disappeared
  Oedasoa took my hand, “come, Krotoa,
  I must explain something to you, something we want
  you to do to help protect your people from the strangers”

  I went with him
  I sat beside him on a slone
  and he instructed me


434     ♦   1990s AND 2000s
afterwards I went out to the edge of the camp
and sat where a bush owl slept on a tree
but the sounds of the earth seemed to move away from me
like birds drawing back from a fresh kill
after a while there was silence
and though I fixed my eyes on the owl’s claws
it was Oedasoa’s voice that beat on my ears
until I couldn’t see anything
couldn’t hear anything


like a dry twig
fallen off a tree
I sat silently in the long grass




who is this person Oedasoa has commanded
I have not met her before


who is this person who will go
and live among strangers
to learn their meaning?


her name is Krotoa, but I do not know her




riding on a shining ox
high above the shoulders of the men
the long grass touching my feet
I am the chief’s sister
everyone knows my mission
I am the young one, the clever one
sent to meet the strangers
I am the pointed spear
flung into the heart of the enemy
I will return over these grasses
trailing their secrets like the entrails
of the captured impala
I have been blessed by Heitsi-Eibib
I have been covered in the perfumed fat of the chief’s pot
sitting in the sun I ride
into the heart of the enemy
[•••]



                                                Krotoa’s Story   435
      Ill
      In the night of that first day, I did not know what I was.
      Prisoner?
      Guest?
      No-one spoke to me. They showed me to a room. Dark, cold,
      like skins soaked in rain and forgotten. I stayed there until
      so long had passed that I seemed to have gone far away.


      Then I thought, I must see whether I am free, went out of the
      room, walked, following the smell of air until I came out under
      the sky.


      It was warm, but there was no-one anywhere.


      Standing outside the walls I looked at the stars, neck bent back
      I imagined round me the fire where they were all sitting now,
      on the other side of the mountain, the stories, songs, nGai next
      to me, I cried, but silently in case this was not allowed. I did not
      know what to do except to go back inside and wait to be called. I
      could not find my room, so I stayed in the open place between
  the walls where they keep their animals. In the morning I woke
  up, two men were standing laughing at me, I felt afraid. I stood
  up and waited in front of them looking at the ground. When
  they had stopped laughing they went to let out the animals, I
  followed the cattle and sheep outside, no-one stopping me.
  There was one I recognised, a cow from Oedasoa’s kraal, I used
  to milk her. I could not stop myself from crying.


  I could keep walking, would they stop me?
  I could go back across the veld and over the mountain,
  no-one has talked to me, I could just blow away like a leaf
  going back to its tree—then Autshomoa’s eyes found me,
  and tied me down to this place.




  I learn Dutch


  I say “Good morning,” “Thank you,” “My name is Eva”


  I say “Commander Jan van Riebeeck says”

  these are the words I learn:
                              *




436     ♦   1990s and 2000s
ox sheep dress table mevrouw hottentot mountain ship dutch
sea pearls because soon gold milk far exchange danger skins
man sick wine copper meat holland slave bed shoes bring god
one many bible elephant onions boundary promise


I say “My name is Eva”


Commander Jan van Riebeeck taught me


Eva dress shoes
Eva room dark
Eva eyes
Eva mouth


Eva is the dutch word for Krotoa
[•••]

IV
after many seasons I went home
in the spring, back to my people, I said goodbye
to the Commander, to the dutch Council,
they gave me presents tor my services,
I promised them I would remember their interests
at home, and I left them


but in the autumn I returned


(my home, my path over the mountains,
and this chair of dark wood in the office
where I have sat watching the Commander,
soft hair bending over me, gentle hands
in this dark cave, my flowers, my yellow birds
calling me, I am coming to you!)
[•••]


V
no word came for me from Oedasoa, ever


and so I stayed among those people
became a dutch wife, learned
to speak in long dutch sentences,
became a widow, standing like a wild buck
in the yard of the foreigners




                                                 Krotoa’s Story   ♦   437
      they would not take me in, hottentot woman
      nor would they let me run away, they broke my legs


      mine are the crippled footprints
   worn into the rocks along the harbour wall


      the beginning was an exploding sun
      I ran dancing into the fire
      the end unravelled like an old root,
      dry with sorrow, lasting forever




      Epilogue
      I am looking for one bird—
      a bird from the flock of tall lagoon-dwellers
      that I watched quietly digging for fish
      in the waters of my childhood—
      one who will listen to me
   and then tell my story to one other
   who in turn will pass it on
      along the edges of the lagoon
   up and down the coast these ships follow
   forever, let it lodge between the stones of every beach
   where my own tears have carried on the waves
   to moor themselves:


      Krotoa became Eva
   and then became again
   Krotoa


   died at the Cape, 29th July 1674
   and is remembered




                      Sindiwe Magona, STELLA
                           South Africa 1991     English

Sindiwe Magona was born in the rural Transkei in 1943 and moved to Cape Town
at the age of five, living fir^t in Blaauvlei and later, as dictated by the apartheid
forced removals, in the sprawling township of Guguletu. She trained as a teacher,
but when she unexpectedly found herself pregnant, had to resign. Magona ascribes


438     ♦   1990s AND 2000s
her inadequate sex education to the breakdown of family and other authority
structures in her community. Her husband absconded when she was in her third
pregnancy and, faced with the urgent demands of survival and few other available
options, she became a domestic worker. In her autobiography, she describes this as
“the kind of work . . . that breaks the body and crushes the spirit.”
   Magona was able to leave domestic service and return to teaching in 1967, con¬
tinuing her own formal schooling through correspondence. During these years she
became active in such community organizations as Church Women Concerned, the
Women’s Movement for Peace, and the National Council of African Women. In
1976, she represented South Africa at the Brussels meeting of the International
Women’s Tribunal of Crimes Against Women. In 1981 she was granted a scholar¬
ship to Columbia University in New York, where she completed an M.A. in social
work before taking up a post at the New York office of the United Nations. She
continues to live and work in New York, but plans to return permanently to South
Africa upon her retirement.
   She has published a two-part autobiography, To My Childrens Children (1991)
and Forced to Grow (1992), and two collections of short stories, Living, Loving and
Lying Awake at Night (1991), from which the story below is taken, and Push, Push
and Other Stories (1996). Her first novel, Mother to Mother, was published in 1998
and imagines the chain of events that led to the fatal stabbing of American
Fulbright scholar Amy Biehl in August 1993 in Guguletu.
   Drawing on her own experiences, Magona has written vividly about the diffi¬
cult and complex lives of domestic workers. “Stella” is a prime example of the neat
vignettes of Magona’s early writing.
                                                                        Meg Samuelson


                                         ♦

“Saw your medem’s car drive off. Guess she’s off to her Self Defence class?
Thought I’d pop over. Put the kettle on, girl. You know my Goat Food
Woman, the fridge is full of leaves, seeds, growing things, and smelly rot¬
ting things. The milk is from beans, she tells me. Beans. I wasn’t raised by
people who milk beans. Beans have teats? Hey, if were not careful, one of
these days these strange women we work for will teed us snakes and frogs I
tell you.
    “There, the kettle is boiling. We have no tea or coffee in that house: ‘Those
are drugs, Stella,’ my medem tells me. But my head tells me something else.
   “Thank you, sure smells good. Thank you. If I had the money, I’d buy
myself at least coffee and put it in my room.
  “I don’t know why I go on working for such a sour suurlemoen of a
woman, you know? Believe me, I know we say a lot of bad things about
stork legs, your medem, but at least with her, you know where you stand.
Not that change-face so-and-so I work for.
  “I’m sure you’ve seen her with her always-mouth-open-face: she could
win a Mrs Sunshine Sweetest Smile Competition; couldn’t she? Always
cheerful she looks, hey? Don’t be fooled. I could tell you things about that
woman—things you would never believe.


                                                                   Stella     ♦   439
      “Gets me downright mad to think of the way she has used me over the
years. But, I get even. I pay her back; and then some more.
      “She wipes her sunshine smile away when she talks to me and she wants
to tell me something she knows is not nice.
      “‘Stella,’ she will say Thursday lunchtime, ‘can you please be back for
dinner? I’m having visitors tonight.’
      “Now, tell me that is not cruel. Here’s a woman who has seven days a
week like everybody else. When does she choose to entertain? On the one
evening a week she knows her maid is off. And her smile is there for every¬
one to see how kind she is.
      “From the word go, I knew there was something not nice about this
woman I work for. First day here, what do I find? There’s her bath tub full
of water. The same water she’s just had a bath in. Her dirty water. Dirty
from her own body. It is too dirty for her to put her hand in and pull the
plug out. Can you believe that? This woman would leave her bath water for
me to let it out?
      “I’m not saying she should wash the tub. Hey, she’s paying me to do that
—O.K. But, you mean she can’t let out her own, own water?
      “And, if you think that’s all I found in that tub you’re wrong. There,
swimming, afloat in that water of hers, was her panty . . . she’d left it in
there for me to wash.
   “What! Me? I taught her a lesson, that very first day. I took something,
a peg, I think, and lifted that panty of hers and put it dripping wet, to the
side of the bath which I then cleaned until it was shiny-shiny.
   “You think she got my message? Wrong. Doesn’t she leave me a note:
‘Stella, wash the panty when you wash the bath.’
   “What do you mean what did I do? I did not go to school for nothing. I
found a pen in her bookshelf and found a piece of paper and wrote her a
note too:
  “‘Medem,’ I said in the note, ‘please excuse me but I did not think anyone
can ask another person to wash their panty. I was taught that a panty is the
most intimate thing . . . my mother told me no one else should even see my
panty. I really don’t see how I can be asked to wash someone else’s panty.’
  “That was the end of that panty nonsense. You see, she leaves the house
very early. And at that time I worked sleep-out for her so we used to write
a lot of messages for each other.
  “And then every Sunday she’s off to Church. Hypocrites, these white
people are. Real hypocrites. Never practise what they preach.
  “She goes to Church every Sunday, but when Master isn’t here, you
should see what goes on in this place. Then, she comes home early from
work: ‘Stella, you can take the rest of the day off.’
   “What am I supposed to do with a half day off I didn’t know I was get¬
ting? You think I have money to be running up and down for nothing? But,
that doesn’t worry Sunshine Smile. All she wants is that there’s no maid to
see her business. Hypocrite and skelm on top of it too.


440     ♦   1990s and 2000s
  “But me, I take the cheek out oi her. I take the half day off she gives me.
But I stay right here in my room and give myself a rest.
   “And she doesn’t know I need to rest. She thinks I am a donkey that can
go on and on working. When I’m off, do you know she can think nothing
of giving me a whole suitcase full of clothes. Don’t think she’s like other
medems who give their girls their old clothes. Not this one, my friend. She
wants me to sell those clothes for her.
   “‘Here Stella,’ the smile is bigger than the whole sky, ‘I’m sure your
friends in Langa would like these clothes. Almost new.’
  “That’s the woman I work for. It is not enough I work for her six to six,
six days a week. On my half day off 1 must be working for her. Selling her
second-hand clothes. She even pins the price on each one.
  “Now don’t think these almost new clothes have been dry-cleaned. You
think she’d spend her money like that? There, I must carry clothes smelling
her smell, carry them home and sell them to my friends. Of course, the
one’s the donkey can wash, those she sees to it that they are washed and
ironed. She’s not stingy with my strength, oh no!
  “Then she’ll take one of these clothes, look at it like it was a child going
away, and say—‘Take this one for yourself.’ That is how she pays me lor
carry-ing a heavy suitcase, making my friends laugh at me selling her silly
clothes. You know, sometimes I just save myself the trouble, take the
clothes and pay her the money—bit by bit—until I’ve paid all of it. Then,
when I find someone going back to the village, I send the clothes to my
relatives there.
   “You don’t think you would be sick working for someone like this—
making you work like a donkey and feeding you goat food? She really gets
on my nerves. But I must be careful. If there’s one thing that makes her out
and out mad at me—it’s when I’m sick.
  “My sickness she never understands. She thinks I’m made of stone. She,
can be sick and when she’s sick I must run all over the place making her
feel good: ‘Turn the TV on. Turn the TV off. Make me black tea. Warm
me some milk. I want dry toast. Give the margarine. Go get me the news¬
paper. I forgot, Cosmopolitan is out. Take all calls and write down the mes¬
sages. Is that Joan? I’ll take the call.’
   “But I must never get sick. ‘You think I run a clinic here, my girl?’That’s
what she says first day I’m sick. Day number two: ‘Maybe you should go
home and send one of your daughters to help.’
  “You know this woman has children the same ages as mine. I must send
my children here to help her and her children while I’m sick. My children
must miss school to come and make sure their goat food is made, the beds
are made, their shoes are polished, their clothes are washed.
   “I also discovered she doesn’t like me to be sick and stay here. I think
she believes my sickness will jump onto them and kill them all. It s all right
for me to catch their germs when they are sick. But my germs—that’s a
different story.


                                                             Stella *     441
      “Ho! White people! You slave for them. Slave for their children. Slave
for their friends. Even slave for their cats and dogs. And they thank you
with a kick in the back.
      “Anyway, I must go. I’m making yoghurt bread over there, the dough
must be ready by now. Hey, thanks for the coffee—now, I’m really awake.”




                     Beh NIa’an, GIRAFFE SONG
                              Namibia 1991      Ju/’hoansi


This story recounts a moment of creative inspiration that took place in the early
decades of the last century, probably sometime during the 1930s. It was told to me
in 1991 by Beh NIa’an, a Ju/’hoan San woman living then at N=aqmtjoha, Namibia,
in what is now Otjozondjupa district in the northeast part of the country. Beh had
told her story during the 1950s to ethnographer Lorna Marshall, who included it
in an article in the journal Africa and more recently in her book Nyae Nyae !Kung
Beliefs and Rites. Although the versions told to Marshall and myself differed in
some details, they were clearly variations of the same story.
      There are several other versions of Beh’s story that other Ju/’hoan people have
told as well. Each one has slightly different details. Oral storytellers in the
Ju/’hoan tradition like Beh say that they are faithfully “repeating” a tale when what
they are actually doing is telling it in their own words. These words reflect the per¬
formance situation of the moment and cannot be extricated from it. Concentration
on words and details per se is a phenomenon of alphabetic literacy that has long
distorted outsiders’ understanding of communication in oral societies.
      In Ju/’hoan society, there is a high degree of tolerance for individual contribu¬
tions to both religious life and oral tradition. This high tolerance may be related to
the egalitarian nature of the society, whose norms are enforced not by dogma but
by a creative participation of all members. Where spoken communication is the
model for information exchange, two messages may be regarded as “the same” even
though they are rarely verbatim equivalents.
   One of the ways others told Beh’s story was this: A woman named Beh was
alone one day in the bush. She saw a herd of giraffes running before an approach¬
ing thunderstorm. The rolling beat of their hooves grew louder and mingled in her
head with the sound of sudden rain. Suddenly, a song she had never heard before
came to her, and she began to sing. G//aoan (the great god) told her it was a med¬
icine song.
   Beh went home and taught the song to her husband, /Ai!ae. They sang it and
danced together. It was indeed a song for trancing, a medicine song. /Ai!ae taught
it to others who also passed it on. Old men can name the people who learned the
song in turn as it spread eastward from Namibia into Botswana. The giraffe med¬
icine song tradition, stemming from a single inspired individual, has virtually
replaced the earlier gemsbok singing and dancing over vast areas of the Kalahari.
  The version printed here is one that Beh told when she was a very old woman;
it contains a lively welter of details. The excerpt ends on a note of sadness, with
Beh saying that she has outlived her husband and all her old playmates. Beh N!a’an
(“Old Beh”) died in 1992, in an accidental hut fire, shortly after her middle-aged



442     *   1990s AND 2000s
son /Ui, who had learned the giraffe song as a very young child, died of tubercu¬
losis. This 1991 version was videotaped by Thomas Dowson and I, and is available
from the Witwatersrand University Film Unit.
                                                                   Megan Biesele


                                       ♦
I am going to start with where the giraffe ran toward me. We were walk¬
ing along up to the death place of the meat, we went to the place where the
eland had died. When I saw the giraffes I began to sway in rhythm with
them, it seemed as if I easily began to do that. I did it, and did it, and con¬
tinued to do it.
   My husband said to me, “What are you doing?”
   “What am I doing?” I asked.
   “You are swaying like a giraffe.”
   The death place was as close as this appelblaar. The giraffes were com¬
ing from this direction. They came past us. My son’s younger sister was not
born yet, at that time. In fact the giraffe spirits had long ago entered me.
I kept doing, doing, doing it, and that was the Great Giraffe Song . . .
   The Great Song has never ended. My voice is gone and my eyes are
split, and I don’t know ... I am going deaf. I can’t hear; my ears can’t hear.
That is what disturbs me.
  If I did not feel like death, I would be singing a song for what is hap¬
pening in the sky now [rain is coming as we speak], I would sing and sing.
If I had eyes I would sing and look around . . .
   We ate the meat and I was swaying and trembling. Swaying like a
giraffe, I helped pack up the meat and bring it home. And we just stayed
well in the village and ate the meat. I almost died but instead lived.
  We sat quietly and ate the meat. But in fact these people—the giraffe spir¬
its—had climbed inside me. I ate meat and it tasted good. I had been hungry
for a long time but then I had meat. That is where I got the giraffe song. My
husband, who has a soft diaphragm [meaning he goes into trance easily], got
n/om [spiritual medicine] then. And those were the songs of it, what one that
people go around dancing. Those songs came out of my mouth. Those who
came from the west, the giraffe people, brought them home. They came to me
but my diaphragm was hard [this kept me from trancing]. My husband’s
diaphragm is soft. That is where he was able to enter it.
   [Later my son began to dance too.] He danced and I watched him. He
danced and danced beautifully and moved forward like a snake. And I
watched him.
  Sometimes my husband would speak to the rain and it would not listen,
but I would sing and it would listen [and the thunder would grow soft].
You say to the rain, “Wait, slow down. Bring us water. Make the earth
healthy, cool under the children’s feet.”
  A woman can run out of her house and speak thus to the rain. Or if I go
out gathering, I might find an animal that has been killed, or the chest of


                                                        Giraffe Song      ♦   443
something [that the carnivores have left]. But if it was a man, it would also
be good for him to find the track of something like that in the bush and
bring it home for us to eat. You say this: “That is how it is, that is how it is.”
      You say, “Let the sha look good and ripe.” Then you dig, dig, dig it, and
spend the day, the two of us, eating it. A woman can run out and say that.
That is what you say. And your husband will enter and agree with you, say¬
ing “Why are we two trancing?” “Yes,” you say, “but the two of us have this
song and it is a great thing. They have brought us this thing and we can
dance it and be alive.” My husband said, “They have brought it to you and
both ol us will dance and sing it.”
      So I hung beads all around my head. The young women of our village
all hung dangling beads around their heads. The young men also tied leg
bangles on their legs. You go visiting to the north and the people from
there watch you. “People, let’s watch this beautiful thing they are doing
here.” People gave gifts of ostrich beads, and people danced and watched
and watched. We were very beautiful. We combed our hair with oil, and
combed the men’s hair with oil. That is what we did. I danced and sang
until I lost my voice—my “tongue was cut.” But the young girls who were
singing then have all died. They did not eat correctly [did not observe food
avoidances] and they died. I am the only one left. Nobody is left, even my
friend /Asa has died. All that is left are the trees standing in that place.
      People are finished, and I am finished. Those people have all died. I have
grown old and stopped dancing, and today just sit. I am old and have no
strength. The tall camel thorn that was the Giraffe, the Giraffe Dance has
broken. It died with my husband’s death; it has grown small.           The young
girls have all died, and I am the only one left. That is how things are.


                                    Transcribed and translated by Megan Biesele




       Maria Munsaka, NHAMIWA’S M^GIC STICK
                              Zimbabwe 1991     Tonga


“Nhamiwa’s Magic Stick” was told to me in 1991 by Maria Munsaka. Photographer
Margaret Waller and I went to Binga, on the shores of Lake Kariba, to interview
Tonga women about their rich traditions, and to collect material for publication.
   The Tonga are justly famous for their verbal dexterity, their love of stories and
riddles: “Who is the handsome man sleeping in the dust?” “A sweet potato!” Tonga
oral tradition is also dynamic, in touch with changing times and needs. Women are
considered “the stone houses of Tonga culture,” as explained by Joseph Mudimba
of the Binga Craft Centre, “especially when it comes to storytelling, song and
dance. Without their knowledge we would have no identity as a people.”
  Waller and I had a special reason for visiting this remote part of Zimbabwe. The
Tonga are a minority group in Zimbabwe who were displaced in the 1960s to make way



444     ♦   1990s and 2000s
for the construction of the Kariba Dam, which created one of the largest artificial lakes
in the world. Although the government made an effort to save wildlife, no assistance was
given to the Tonga to save their ancestral shrines. In the 1980s the Tonga did not bene¬
fit much from the developmental programs that were introduced after independence.
   Maria Munsaka, we learned, came from an older generation of storytellers.
Celebrated for her lively style and wry humor, she had acquired a large repertoire
of tales from her grandmother. She began entertaining village audiences in Binga
district when she was nine years old. Because Munsaka is married to a polygamist,
her favorite story is about Nhamiwa, an unloved second wife.
                                                                            Fiona Lloyd


                                            ♦


Once there was a polygamist who had two wives. He loved the first very
much but treated the second wife cruelly. Her name was Nhamiwa and she
had spiritual powers. With her magic stick she could separate the waters of
the Zambezi. Every day she accompanied the polygamist to the river bank.
She beat the water with her stick and immediately the river parted, leaving
a dry pathway in the centre. Her husband could walk across without even
getting wet. As soon as he reached the other side the waters closed. He made
this daily journey to steal cattle. At sunset he would call across to Nhamiwa:
   “Nhamiwa, Nhamiwa,
   Beat and part the water!
   I have three fat cattle
   And the middle one is yours!”
   Nhamiwa would beat the water so he could cross. But when the succulent
meat had been cooked and was ready to eat, she was always given bones.
   One day the polygamist went down to the river as usual. Nhamiwa went
with him and beat the water with her stick, just as he requested. He made the
crossing and, at sunset, Nhamiwa heard him calling from the opposite shore:
   “Nhamiwa, Nhamiwa,
   Whose strength can part the water
   Use your stick to let me cross
   And you’ll eat meat tonight!”
    But Nhamiwa’s ears were deaf. The polygamist called again. And again.
Eventually Nhamiwa sang to him across the river:
    “I will not beat the water
   I will not let you cross
   Today you’ll be fixed!”
    Suddenly there was a great commotion. The owners of the beasts had
discovered who was stealing their cattle. Brandishing spears, they sur¬
rounded the polygamist. He called to Nhamiwa yet again. This time his
tone was desperate:
    “Nhamiwa, Nhamiwa
   They’ve come with sharp spears!



                                                  Nhamiwa’s Magic Stick          ♦   445
      Beat the water with your stick
      So I may safely cross!”
      Nhamiwa did nothing. The owners of the cattle set upon the polygamist
and killed him. His body was thrown into the river.


                                        Transcribed and translated by Fiona Lloyd




               Gasethata Segaise, Mmatsheko Pilane,
                      and Motshabi Molefhe,
                    “Lend Me a Dress”:
                 Testimonies on Education
                          Botswana 1991, 1999      Setswana


For many Botswana women of the early twentieth century, going to school was
secondary to family responsibility. Nevertheless, some indomitable women man¬
aged to go to school, and some became teachers, though, sadly, we could find no
documents by or about them. Instead, we interviewed women in their seventies
and eighties who had taught in the 1930s and 1940s. Three excerpts appear here.
      Gasethata Segaise was born in 1921 and started school at the age of twelve. In
1940, aged nineteen, she entered the newly established Teacher Training College
in Serowe. She then taught in a number of primary schools, and even after her
marriage in 1968 continued teaching.
      Mmatsheko Pilane and her sisters went to school as a matter of course because,
as she says, they were “fortunate” that they were all girls. She was born in 1915 and
started school at Linchwe School in Mochudi, about twenty-five miles from
Gaborone. She became a domestic science teacher at the same school, but then left
for Johannesburg in search of better cash opportunities in white people’s kitchens
and nurseries. She returned after a year to work as a teacher once more. After her
marriage in 1939 she gave up teaching.
   Motshabi Molefhe, born in 1910, attended school for six years before becom¬
ing a teacher. She also worked in Johannesburg for ten ydars until her mother took
ill, forcing her to return to Botswana to look after her until her mother’s death.
   None ol these women kept a private archive of their letters, journals, or other
material, even though they could. Two of them, Pilane and Molefhe, said that they
burnt their letters.
                                                     Lily Mafela and Leloba Molema


                                          ♦

Gasethata Segaise, Interviewed January 1991
Women were constrained from attending school because in Setswana tra¬
dition girls had to grind <*orn, cook and draw water. Also, one could be lent
to one s relatives to help them out it they did not have younger girls to per-


446     ♦   1990s and 2000s
form these household duties. In our times, it used to be that when one’s
aunt had a baby, one would be sent to mind the baby. Then maybe when
one returned home one might find that another aunt had also had a baby,
and one would be sent there. One could be exchanged around like that, so
that in the end one would not get a chance to go to school. In my case the
situation was especially bad because I was the only girl in our household
for quite some time, and I eventually had to force matters to go to school,
because my parents used to say, “You cannot go to school, you have to mind
the children. ...” I actually took myself to school, nobody sent me there.
   This is how it happened: it was during harvest time and we were at the
lands at the time, when I decided to borrow a dress from one of my age-
mates and she lent it to me. Then I ran away from the lands and came back
here to the village to register myself at the school. It was at the moment
when I was [in the] registration process, that my father came riding his
horse looking for me. . . . He went over to the principal and told him, “I
have tracked down and followed my child here because she ran away with
the others yesterday.” I was called out by name, and I tried to hide but
there was nowhere to hide, so I had to stand up. And then my father said
out loud, “Yes, that is her, she is the one I am looking for. . . .” Mr. Sebina
was the principal at the time, and he was adamant and told my father, “We
have already registered this child and there is nothing we can do. We can¬
not erase her name, and right now we actually require her to pay the three
shillings school levy.” My father was very upset, but there was nothing he
could do except to pay the required fee, and so I stayed in school.


Mmatsheko Pilane, Interviewed February              1999
When I left teaching I was very hurt because I did not have my own money
anymore. In my marriage I was happy except for the fact that I was con¬
trolled. In those days when you married you did what your husband told
you to do. Even if you wanted to be a schoolteacher you gave it up. Cattle¬
rearing was my husband’s choice and decision. Cattle supported me when
he died. I am now too old to help manage them.
   One day when the Chief, Chief Isang, came to talk to my husband about
his need for teachers in the school, my husband replied, “This woman is
my wife, not our wife. This woman has helped you so far. Now it is my
turn.
   Yes, I did get my inheritance from my father because [i.e., even though]
we were girls. In those days when you were born a girl, inheritance would
be passed to your brothers. We were fortunate because we did not have a
brother.

Motshabi Molefhe, Interviewed February               1999
I don’t have lesson plans or any form of writing. Not even letters. You can
never keep letters. You have to throw them away because sometimes they
will land you in trouble, so you have to get rid of them. At times someone


                  “Lend Me a Dress”: Testimonies on Education           ♦   447
might find you throwing a letter into a blazing fire and ask, “Why are you
burning that letter?” and you respond, “It’s not a letter. It’s just a piece of
paper.” You fear to be in trouble.


       Translated by Lily Mafela (Segaise) and Alpheons Moroke (Pilane and Molefhe)




            Nokwanda Sithole,              A   BROKEN FAMILY
                            South Africa 1991       English


Nokwanda Sithole was one of the first young black women students to complete a
journalism diploma at the (until then) exclusively white Natal Technikon. She
gained wide experience in the press before becoming editor of the magazine
Tribute. A fearless and promising investigative journalist, she died young in a car
accident in the early 1990s.
      The African township of Chesterville is one of the oldest in Durban, having
been built in the 1930s when there was still extreme municipal resistance to the
idea of “family housing” for African workers in the city. The preferred option was
to rely on male migrants, who would leave their families in their countryside
homesteads. Chesterville became a hub of social life for Africans in Durban, cater¬
ing to both workers who enjoyed the music and drink of the shebeens and the
more refined middle class, who organized dramatic and debating societies.
      In the 1980s, however, Chesterville, like other African settlements in the
KwaZulu-Natal region, turned into a battleground for the warring political organ¬
izations, the United Democratic Front (UDF) and Inkatha. The UDF, formed out
ot over six hundred community-based organizations in 1983, was the first mass
national political movement to emerge internally since the banning of political
activity in the early 1960s. (The two organizations referred to in Sithole’s account,
the Congress of South African Students and the Council of Unions of South
Africa—later the Congress of South African Trade Unions—were both UDF affil¬
iates.) The UDF, while not affiliated with the African National Congress (ANC),
was widely identified with the general ethos of the ANC, with the difference that
its leadership was dedicated to a peaceful resolution of'the political impasse. In
certain regions of South Africa, however, the UDF found itself embroiled in
intensely violent conflict with other movements also claiming to be the “legiti¬
mate” internal expression of resistance to apartheid.
   The premier example was Inkatha in KwaZulu-Natal. This movement, built
specifically around a Zulu ethnic identity, claimed mass support in the region and in
mines and certain parts of the Johannesburg area (now Gauteng) where there were
significant numbers of Zulu-speaking workers. Inkatha was in direct ideological
confrontation with the UDF, resulting in years of terrible bloodshed in hundreds of
communities. Chesterville was one of these, and one where the combatants on both
sides were Zulu speakers. Murder and “necklacing” (the killing of opponents by plac¬
ing burning tires around their necks) continued into the early 1990s, even as the var¬
ious political parties were firtally negotiating an end to apartheid. Sithole’s evocative
piece captures the pain of such intense division within a single family.
                                                                        Heather Hughes

448     ♦   1990s AND 2000s
Somewhere in Chesterville, a township outside Durban, there is a broken
family—broken not in the sense of being physically separated, but rather
torn apart by the different, seemingly irreconcilable political ideologies
that have caused endless bloodshed in the province of Natal.
  At the head of the family is Absalom Dumakude, fifty-three, a burly
member of the KwaZulu Police Force. He has been an ardent supporter of
the KwaZulu homeland chief minister and Inkatha leader, Mangosuthu
Gatsha Buthelezi, since the early 1970s. He transferred from the South
African Police to the KwaZulu Police Force when it was formed in 1985.
“Joining became a natural choice,” he says.
  Esther, his wife, is a frail, harassed-looking person. She has no political
affiliations of her own, and says, “Where my husband is, I’ll be.” She says she
“accepted Christ” in 1984, and believes that if humankind would dedicate
itself to seeking solutions to its problems in Christ, this would be a better
world.
   Siphiwe, their eldest child, lives with them in their four-room house. He
is not Mrs. Dumakude’s natural son, having been born out of wedlock to
Mr. Dumakude and a Johannesburg woman thirty-one years ago. In 1976
Siphiwe was a student activist in Soweto. He was there on June 16, when
students took to the streets to protest the use of Afrikaans as a teaching
medium and the police answered with a brutality that shook the whole
country.
  Twelve years later, Siphiwe is a “won’t work” whose face is battered by
years of heavy drinking. He says he doesn’t want to discuss politics: “You
must not tell me about politics. You do not know politics. I know. ... I was
in the frontline in 1976.
   “Where did it get me? When the police started chasing me, I had to
run. I came to Durban to live with my father. In 1977 my father said he
did not have the money to send rebels to school. If I had been man enough
to rise against authority in Soweto, he said, then I could run my own life.”
   Schooling for Siphiwe thus stopped in June 1976. He has had two jobs
since—at a petrol station, and as a cleaner in an office building. He is bit¬
ter because some of his peers got chances to leave the country after the
1976-77 uprising and have studied abroad, making him feel left behind.
  His two sisters, Thembelihle and Khanyisile, rent two rooms in Lamont-
ville, another Durban township. Both are staunch United Democratic Front
supporters. Thembelihle, twenty-nine, works in a Pinetown factory and earns
R100 a week; from this she pays her sister’s school fees. Khanyisile, twenty-
two, is a student at a local school and was a member of the Congress of South
African Students (COSAS). She is doing fairly well at school and plans to
attend a university next year.
   They did not want to leave home, but had no choice. In Chesterville,
they were trapped between, on the one hand, a helpless mother and brother


                                                   A Broken Family ♦       449
with whom they could not share their aspirations and, on the other, a
father who was hostile to those aspirations.
   In addition to the divisions within their family, Thembelihle and Khan-
yisile had problems with their political associates.
      “I could sense that at meetings, people were being careful about what
they said in front of us,” says Thembelihle. “It was terrible. ... At the same
time, what choice did our comrades have? Our father has been an Inkatha
man for a long time. And he is our father. If I were your enemy, would you
be able to eat and drink freely with Khanyisile? No, because Khanyisile and
I are relatives . . . you are the outsider.”
      Thembelihle and Khanyisile left home in 1984, at the height of the vio¬
lent confrontation between the UDF and Inkatha over the incorporation
of Chesterville township into KwaZulu. Shortly after they had gone, an
incident took place that left strong feelings of suspicion in the family and
widened the gulf between the father and his daughters.
      Mr. Dumakude was away visiting relatives and only Siphiwe and Mrs.
Dumakude were home. Around midnight, Esther was awakened by the
crash of breaking glass: “There was no doubt in my mind what it was.
There was a war going on in Chesterville between Inkatha and UDF, and
since my husband was associated with Inkatha and the police, we had been
expecting it. A petrol bomb landed right next to my bed, and I thought it
was all over. By the grace of God, it did not go off, but another landed out¬
side and started a fire.
  “Siphiwe had also been woken up by the shattering glass, and together
we managed to extinguish the fire on the grass outside.
  “When my husband came home the following weekend, he found us a
bundle of nerves. It was worse because Siphiwe thinks he can drown his
sorrows in liquor whether there is an immediate problem or not. We could
not really sit down and talk about what to do, because the only man in the
house just wasn’t interested.”
  The day after Mr. Dumakude arrived, three men were dispatched to
guard the house. He refuses to say where these men came from, whether
they were from the police or Inkatha or were vigilantes.
  Mr. Dumakude blames his daughters for the bombing, which he still
talks about with emotion four years later. They were responsible, he says,
for the “attempted destruction of my family.”
 What if the bomb had detonated? What if his wife had been killed?
Would he see his daughters punished—even killed—for the deed he attrib¬
utes to them? Mr. Dumakude does not answer. He merely mumbles a
barely audible, “Where did it all go wrong?”
   If he met his daughters in the line of duty, when he had orders to shoot
to kill, would he carry out those orders?
  Mr. Dumakude still does not answer. He only says: “You do not know,
you will never know how it feels to bring up children the proper way. You
think that you have instilled in them your values, that you are winning, and


450     ♦   1990s and 2000s
then suddenly they turn against you and effectively tell you that you wasted
your time bringing them into this world.
   Thembelihle and Khanyisile do not live in this house today. My own
daughters were taken up by what foreign people, people who are strangers
to them, taught them. If ever their chosen path becomes too rough for
them, they must not come back here.”
  Mr. Dumakude is an angry man. He feels hatred for the people he calls
“foreign,” people who came and encouraged his daughters to choose a differ¬
ent way from the traditional one that he hoped they would follow and respect.
  Thembelihle says she and her sister grew up in an “apolitical” home: “I
would say that if anybody had any political beliefs when we grew up, he or
she never expressed them. My father started showing admiration for Chief
Buthelezi in the early 1970s. My father is the kind of man who does not
allow any democracy in the house. He had to be the sole policy maker. He
would sing the praises of Buthelezi and we would listen. We were not
exposed to any other political opinions then, and I have vivid memories of
actually developing a great admiration for this man who was being pre¬
sented to me as a liberator—the great leader of the Zulu nation.”
  In 1975 Thembelihle went to a new school where she mixed with stu¬
dents from all over South Africa, some of whom had a much broader polit¬
ical awareness. Those were black consciousness days. Thembelihle and her
new friends would hold discussions on the political situation in the coun¬
try, and she began to form her own ideas on strategies and solutions.
   “Although Khanyisile was still a child, she was the only person at home
with whom I could discuss my ideas. I would bore her for hours with my
stories. . . . That was the beginning of a strong bond between us.”
   Thembelihle says she could have kept her political feelings to herself for
the sake of family unity. She admits that she had seriously considered that
option, but in the early 1980s she found herself in a situation where she
had to make a difficult choice. The turning point came when she worked
in a factory where the workers had been organized by the Council of
Unions of South Africa (CUSA).
   “Some workers who were not as politically conscious as I was refused to
join factory-floor organizations,” she recalls. “My situation was different. I
understood every word that the CUSA representatives were saying when
they were organizing the workers. I knew that workers were the vanguard
of the struggle, and that without us the struggle was doomed.”
   Thembelihle became an active labor leader and later participated in com¬
munity organizations. Khanyisile, in turn, joined COSAS [the Congress of
South African Students] in her teens, a fact that had to be kept secret from
the family at all costs. Meanwhile, Mr. Dumakude’s police and KwaZulu
connections had become a great embarrassment for the two sisters in their
political lives.
  “We could no longer follow my father’s wishes blindly,” says Khanyisile.
“The final straw came in 1984, when my father was told, apparently by a


                                                  A Broken Family      ♦   451
teacher, of my COSAS involvement. He never asked me if I was actually a
member or tried to find out why I had joined or tried to discourage me
from the organization. The sjambok (lash) was the only language he seemed
to think I could understand.”
   Thembelihle says that she and her sister do not hate their father, and
they wish he would understand that they had nothing to do with the
attempted bombing of their home.
   “There was a war going on at that time,” says Khanyisile, “and there
were two sides to it. It is possible that our home was hit by the ‘comrades.’
But my father seems to forget that there is a criminal element which has
crept into the whole situation. And he also knows the kind of people my
brother mixes with. He is always owing people money and provoking
them. So it is also possible that the bombers were my brother’s ‘friends,’
trying to take advantage of the situation.”
  “Our father is one of those in Natal who have mud over their eyes, who
have not seen the real truth of the situation,” says Thembelihle. “One day
he may realize and appreciate what we stand for. One day he may realize
that we are incapable of trying to kill our own family. I just hope it is not
too late.”
   Thembelihle feels sorry for their mother: “It seems she will go to her
grave not having known what it is to formulate an idea of her own.”
      She says that she and her sister talk about their mother a lot, wishing
she could shed her submissiveness and take hold of her own life.
   Esther, for her part, says she misses her daughters: “They are my children.
My children left home for the wilderness because of politics. I stayed with
my husband because I do not know why my children refuse to listen to us.”

H ow does this family see its future?
   Mr. Dumakude: “Thembelihle and Khanyisile will soon see the foolish¬
ness of going against their family. But when they decide to come back here,
there may be no place for them.”
   Thembelihle: “Our family is but a tiny fragment of what is going on
around the country. If we work toward a better futhre for the whole coun¬
try, our family will automatically fall into place.”
   Khanyisile: “It is hard to forgive and forget, and I never really try to pic¬
ture our family together again, but I hope we do not stay enemies forever.”
   Siphiwe: “Thembelihle and Khanyisile left our home. I told them they
will not get anywhere. I told them to look at me. They were lucky because
I am here, they can see what happened to me. This family will never have
children it can be proud of.”
  Mrs. Dumakude: “I pray every day that my family may become one again.”




452     ♦   1990s and 2000s
      Cinikile Mazibuko and Makhosazane Nyadi,
            Two        Dream-Miracle Stories
                           South Africa 1992      English


The two women who related these dream and miracle stories are sisters and fol¬
lowers of the prophet Isiah Shembe, who founded ibandla lamaNazaretha (Church
of the Nazarites) around 1911 in Inanda, near Durban. Shembe died in 1935.
Today his church is spread throughout southern Africa but its members are located
chiefly in KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng; they are thought to number between
250,000 and 1,000,000 people. The Nazarite ideals are founded in traditional
Nguni principles of respect and public male authority; collective participation in
ritualized performances of prayer, sacred song, and dance; and the exchange of
dream-miracle narratives called “sermons.” Sermons enable women to speak in
public spaces where Zulu women would traditionally keep silent, and, in giving
evidence of the power of their God, Shembe (his prophet takes the same name),
the women’s words become part of a collective store of Nazarite truth.
   In as much as these narratives relate individual women’s lives and experiences,
and contain their critical understanding of state and traditional patriarchal power,
they indicate a way in which Nazarite women may claim their identity and place
in history. Common to all their stories are the pain and hardship of life under a
racist government and within traditional patriarchy, followed by a triumph over
suffering brought about through miraculous or dream encounters with Shembe.
   On two nights of each month, called amaforteenies after the date, the married
women of the Nazarite church meet and exchange stories about their personal
encounter with, or witnessing of, the power of Shembe to provide healing for the
sick, fertility for the barren, economic resources for the destitute, and, through his
mediation with the ancestors, reunion of family members lost through warfare,
migrant labor, and other misfortunes.
  The significance of the date, 1937, in the second story is that the events
described took place two years after the death of Isiah Shembe, by which time he
would have been firmly associated with the ancestral domain. His miraculous
bringing of children represents a reintegration of the ancestors into mission-taught
Christianity, an anticolonial realignment of traditional Nguni epistemology with
the teachings that underwrote colonial power.
   The first story by Cinikile Mazibuko, from Dube in Soweto, recounts the expe¬
riences of another woman in her group. It illustrates the effects ol extreme eco¬
nomic deprivation on a woman’s life, indicates how she managed her anxiety, and
then recounts the sudden and miraculous appearance of money. The second story,
about Shembe’s healing their mother’s infertility, was begun by Cinikile Mazibuko
and completed by her sister, Makhosazane Nyadi. The dokoda to which Cinikile
refers is a temporary shelter representing the Old Testament tabernacle and used
during the January and July gatherings of the church.
                                                                      M. J. Daymond




                                        Two Dream-Miracle Stories             *   453
                                      ♦


ClNIKILE MAZIBUKO: FIRST STORY
After standing up, she told us that one day she had no money. No money
to give her children to carry to school. Even her husband hasn’t got money.
She had only a ticket to go to work. Her husband used to collect her from
work to home. That day, her husband came late to collect her.
   During the day she failed to get money because even when she went to
the bank, they didn’t give her money. . . . On their way home, they were not
talking to each other because they haven’t got money. You know, she said,
on the highway next to Diepkloof, the traffic cop passed them. He was
running at high speed. He passed them.
  Then she saw something like papers coming away from the scooter. Then
this lady said, “What is this?” She tried to pick out of the—look at . . . What
was it? What was falling out from the traffic cop? The traffic cop didn’t
wait. He just passed.
  Then she asked her husband to stop the car. The husband stopped the
car, and they got out. Those that were coming out of the scooter was the
money. It was in fifties'. Fifty papers! They picked those—she didn’t say
how much. But, she said, it just went away from the scooter like papers.
They, they picked it. The husband was picking, she also was picking.
  That’s how Shembe helped them, because she said that if it was not
because of Shembe, she was not going to get that money. But, because of
Shembe. . . . She asked him, “Shembe, can you help me? Because I have got
no money.” Then Shembe put the money to this traffic cop, then blew it
away. So they got the money.


ClNIKILE MAZABUKO: SECOND STORY
My mother said when she was umkhoti, or newly-wed, she used to get chil¬
dren and the children used to die. Maybe when the child is six months, less
than a year, the child dies. Now, here were six children dying.
  They came in Nhlangakaze [the Nazarite holy mountain], the very same
Nhlangakaze that it was in 1937 when my mother dame here to this Nhlan¬
gakaze. When [s]he came here, [s]he says there were them [izimbongi\, as you
always hear shouting—people must do this and this—you see. So she said,
they were here. Then somebody came and said, “Shembe says that all those
who are here, who want children, must come up to him on the mountain.”
   So my mother went up with the other women who didn’t have children.
Up to where Shembe was going to pray for them. They all went up. My
mother said then Shembe came and said, “People must be ready.” They
must pray, you see. You see, as we pray, we close our eyes. My mother says
as [s]he was closing her eyes, [s]he heard Shembe coming.
  In her vision, my mother [s]he saw that Shembe had a basket. In the
basket there was something like stars. [S]he said Shembe was taking the
stars like this, he was throwing the stars like that. [S]he said some other


454   ♦   1990s AND 2000s
stars too, were coming to my mother. [S]he said she just took them out
[like] this, and do like this to hold the stars. The stars were just flying too.
But the stars were jumping from one woman to the other women. Not
everybody was getting these stars. But, to my mother, those stars came.
   She said that she just put out the dress to hold the stars. The stars came.
Then [he] was just praying lor them, that “God, I am just praying for them, I
am just asking that you please help this person, this poor woman to please get
children.” Like that [he] was praying, praying that side [in heaven]. “Amen.”
When Shembe said, “Amen,” my mother was holding like this, because she
saw that vision of the stars in the basket that Shembe was giving the people.
  When my mother came down from the mountain, here to the dokoda,
she was here with, she came with her mother. She said, “Mother, you know,
I saw this vision up there. I saw Shembe had a basket lull of stars, and he
was throwing stars to everybody. The stars were jumping, going from [one]
to [the] others, and the other stars came to me, and I just held them like
this.” Then my mother said, “My child, you are really going to get children.
When Shembe has prayed for you, and you’ve seen that, you really are
going to get children.”


Makhosazane Nyadi completed the story:
When my mother is sleeping, she had a feeling at the back, a pain. She
asked the other women, “Just look at the back. What’s going on with my
back? There is something.” You know when you get burnt, maybe it was
hot water—it was something like that. My mother was crying, and the
other followers—women of Shembe—said, “No, you must not cry. It is the
way Shembe is healing you.” My mother said, “Whooo, how can that be?”
  Then my mother went home. When she was at home, she got pregnant.
One day she was sleeping and she heard somebody telling her, “I am
Shembe. I am bringing you children. Your first-born will be a girl. Her
name will be Makhosazane [Princess].” I am Makhosazane now.

                                                   Transcribed by Carol Muller




 Elizabeth Ncube, PRAISE TO MBUYA NEHANDA
                         Zimbabwe 1993       siNdebele


Until her death at the age of thirty-six in 1996, Elizabeth Ncube was generally
considered one of Zimbabwe’s finest praise poets. She began by performing praise
poetry in the Bulawayo township beer-halls. Her program originally included
established praises about Shaka Zulu and the amaNdebele kings, but later she
began writing her own poems about political leaders and the liberation struggle.
Her performances, which dealt with contemporary political issues, became popu¬
lar and she was invited to perform at state functions and traveled abroad to


                                         Praise to Mbuya Nehanda         ♦   455
Holland, Canada, and the United States.
      Ncube was herself a traditional healer and spirit medium. She was inspired to
create her praises of Nehanda partly to celebrate women in the liberation struggle
and also because of men’s hostility to her performing praises—traditionally a male
activity. At the neShamwari Festival in 1992, when Ncube entered a competitive
section for amaNdebele praise poetry, her performing angered a group of older
men from Bulawayo. One of them came on stage reciting one of her own praise
poems in opposition to her. They engaged in a shield and stick fight. Ncube was
able to drive him off the stage using her superior fighting skills. Although pleased
by the victory and sure that it had proved that the ancestors authorized her per¬
forming praises, she was hurt by the men’s opposition to her work.
   When performing traditional praises, Ncube wore the dress of a male warrior
because she was undertaking a male activity and wanted to honor her male ances¬
tors. When performing her praise to Nehanda, Ncube dressed in the black cloth
worn by women spirit mediums. In doing so she was calling forward the ancestral
grandmothers—not a metaphoric act, since invoking the gods when you know they
are present can be a dangerous undertaking—and transforming her performance
from a male to a female activity. Her poem, recorded on videotape in 1993 by
Martin Rohmer, engages national issues as well as gender politics. In praising a
Shona ancestral spirit in siNdebele, Ncube’s choice of language acknowledges that
Nehanda is a national spirit, an ancestral spirit of Zimbabwe.
   The Nehanda spirit is a mhondoro spirit. In Shona culture mhondoro spirits give
rain and are the most senior ancestral spirits. Nehanda has two official mediums,
one in the Mazoe area, near Harare, and the other in the Dande area, in the
Zambezi Valley. In 1896, the Nehanda medium in Mazoe, a woman named
Charwe, was a major leader of the rebellion, or First Chimurenga, against the colo¬
nial state. She was captured, sentenced to death, and hanged. While on trial, she
remained defiant, refused to convert to Christianity, and (according to legend)
prophesied that her bones would rise to win back freedom from the Europeans.
Many Zimbabweans believe that during the Zimbabwe War of Independence in
the 1960s, the Second Chimurenga, the Nehanda medium in Dande sanctioned
the fighting when she moved to Mozambique to support the liberation struggle.
Nehanda became both a spiritual symbol for and an embodiment of the long-
awaited victory over the European colonial oppressors, and a major figure in the
songs and writings of the liberation struggle.
  At traditional ceremonies, the grandmother spirits a?e usually the first to pos¬
sess the mediums so as to “open the way” for the rest of the spirits. In this case,
Mbuya Nehanda opened the way for Zimbabwe’s independence and now, in this
poem—like a prayer and close to a curse—for the liberation of women.
                                                                  Christopher Hurst


                                         ♦

  Heroine, Mbuya Nehanda
  You finder of the nation, being a woman
  You stand for the nation, being a woman
  Open the way for us, we are your orphans.
  You left us while fighting the enemy.


456     ♦   1990s AND 2000s
  The suckers of our wealth sucked the wealth of the nation
  Being proud and giving themselves power.
  Mbuya Nehanda, you prophesied saying
  Your Bones would rise from the dead.
  The spear of the nation changed
  To hold fire and became a rifle
  Dub! dub! dub! dub! [noise of gun]
  Which brought freedom to our country.
  The wealth suckers are the ones who know
  Who sucked the wealth of our country
   Sucking the blood of our nation
   Giving themselves power.
  Mbuya Nehanda, you prophet
   Sleep and rest, rest, you heroine
  We praise your brave death for the nation
   Mbuya Nehanda
   Sleep and rest, heroine
   Sleep and rest.


                                    Transcribed and translated by Musa Ndlovu




                     Thoko Remigia Makhanya,
               A Noble Woman of Africa
                          South Africa 1993      isiZulu


Thoko Remigia Makhanya first met the subject of her praises in 1984 when
Nokukhanya Luthuli celebrated her eightieth birthday. The idea of a book about
Nokukhanya was born at that party, and Makhanya learned the family’s history as
she participated in the research for the book. Then, and after reading the book in
draft, she felt equipped to write her poem to Nokukhanya. She performed it in
isiZulu at the party given upon the book’s publication in 1993. She translated her
poem into English herself and says that it is impossible for English to capture the
deep poetry of the Zulu language.
   Beginning as it does with lineage matters, Thoko Makhanya’s poem conforms
more to the traditional pattern of praises than does Gcina Mhlophe’s “In Praise of
Our Mothers” (see text in this volume). Makhanya also focuses on Nokukhanya’s
political achievements, as she pictures her “silently . . . shout[ing]” to the world
that women build and sustain a nation. The phrase, “Mrs Edward’s Place,” is a
characteristic way for praise poetry to refer to a location—Inanda Seminary is the
place of its first principal. The poem draws on the comparatively little studied
Zulu practice of women’s composing their own praises and of women’s performing
clan and other praises. Unlike much men’s praise poetry focused on violence and
courage, this poem, like most praise poetry by women, celebrates the braveries of
“perception” and “building and sustenance of the nation.”



                                          A Noble Woman of Africa *             457
      Makhanya was born in Hlokozi near the town of Highflats on the KwaZulu-
Natal south coast. She attended a mission school in her area before going to St.
Francis’s College, Marianhill. She then trained as a nurse at St. Mary’s Hospital,
Marianhill, before specializing in midwifery at McCords Zulu Hospital in
Durban. She worked chiefly in rural areas before returning to study as a nurse edu¬
cator at the University of Natal. After twenty-three years in this profession she
took early retirement and since 1998 has been running HIV-AIDS workshops in
the rural areas for the Women’s Leadership and Training Program. Although she
has some writing tucked away at home, this poem was her first publication.
                                                                 M. J. Daymond


                                            ♦

  The seed that came down from Swaziland
  And got planted among the aloes of Ntunjambili
      Got washed down with the Umngeni floods
  And took root in Umngeni valleys.


      In the midst of the Ngcolosi valleys
  We saw a light flicker and then shine bright;
      Still marvelling at this apparition
  We heard that Nozincwadi of Ngidi
      Had blessed the house of Maphitha of Ndlokolo
      Of Bhengu of Ngcolosi
  With another daughter—Nokukhanya.


  Maphitha of Ndlokolo of Bhengu
      Saw that this light was temporal in this area;
  He deployed his work party by moonlight to the fields
      So that this light might complement the moon
  And shine beyond the Ngcolosi valley in time to come
  And warm the Madlanduna (Luthuli) offspring.


  The ancestor in education has shown the way;
  John Langalibalele Dube
  Took this flickering lamp out of the mist
  And planted it in the well of education
  In Ohlanga school


  When Nozincwadi was called to her ancestors
  This little lamp was left blown about by the winds
  Till those from Mrs Edward’s Place took over;
  When they saw enthusiasm and thirst for knowledge
  They took her under their wing
  And only demanded sweat from her brow.



458     ♦   1990s and 2000s
A star that arose from Umngeni
When others appear in the sky,
A fire that was lighted at Ohlanga
Stoked at Inanda and Amanzimtoti
And burned all the way to the hills of Mpushini
Manzimtoti, you have played a great role
By keeping this fire warmly lit
Till it settled on the plains of Groutville
To warm the Madlanduna Clan.


Little did Maphitha know
That he had donated a light to the nation;
He let it move across the valley and hills acquiring knowledge
To fulfil Nozincwadi’s wishes.


You have been cooked in a hot one
And have come out as pure as gold
Praising Maphitha’s iron hand.
Your perception is amazing
You see a silver lining in every cloud.


We’ve seen you carry your load
With a steady head and a straight back.
With zeal you’ve contributed
To the building and sustenance of the nation
Silently you shouted to the deaf world
That it is women who sustain the struggle for liberation.


Who has not seen you in Swaziland
Toiling away to achieve Mandlanduna’s aims;
You were his hands and feet
Reaching where he couldn’t because of his chains;
With all this you still kept the nest warm and adequate.


Who has not heard of you in Groutville?
At dawn you are already in the fields
Keeping company with your new-found friend the soil
Together solving problems that failed abler minds.


This is the mole of the Nkungu Clan
That toiled by night leaving mounds of soil
As the only evidence of its presence.


Mountains and valleys your silence bothers me;
Echo my shouts across and beyond


                                     A Noble Woman of Africa     ♦   459
  As I wonder at this unseen work
  And praise these achievements
  That have been kept in darkness.


      Receive you valleys and steeps
  This song of praise for the great farmer
  Who challenged the tradition
  And achieved feats beyond her given status.


  I praise the many-roled woman
  Mother, father, wife, teacher, nurse,
  Farmer, environmentalist and theologian;
  You’ve played all these without shortcomings.


  I applaud the broad back
  That carried the struggle up the steep hills;
      Surely, Luthuli, you were paired with a leader.
  The field you’ve covered together is praiseworthy.


  Home hills and mountains
  Even though you are silent
  The worlds across the seas have heard;
  Waves, I praise you for carrying my voice across the oceans
  To the shores of Norway and America;
  I am now consoled that the corners of the world have heard.


  Nokukhanya of Maphitha of Nozincwadi
  You have made your contribution;
  The Bhengu and Luthuli ancestors
  H ave blessed you with many years;
  We too thank you lor the nine decades of life
  Shared with us and your children’s children
  Teaching us the way to go;                            '
  We shall struggle to make your dream come true.


  Woman of Women! Mother of the Nation!
  We praise the Name of Woman!


                                       Translated by Thoko Remigia Makhanya




                              \




460     ♦   1990s AND 2000s
          Communal, SWAZI WEDDING SONGS
                              Swaziland 1993      siSwati


These Swazi wedding songs, recorded in the early 1990s, describe the traditional
culture of the wedding itself and also the construction of marriage, often seen as
hurtful to, or at least difficult for, women. On the morning of the wedding, for exam¬
ple, Song One describes the way in which the bride’s hair is dressed into a beehive
hairstyle. During the main day of the wedding, the bride remains hidden behind the
front row of dancers. Relatives and friends strain to see her while they listen to songs
about her beauty. She appears only to dance the main song, the request to her
mother-in-law for a place in the new home. Similarly, Song Two alludes to the
bride-price sent by the groom’s family, usually in the form of cows, an act that pre¬
cedes preparations by the bride’s family for the wedding. Song Three describes what
actually will happen: The bride will leave her family’s home “justly”—with her
father’s permission and blessing—to become forever part of the groom’s family.
   Songs Five, Six, Seven, and Eight, on the other hand, describe in an ascending
scale the tribulations of marriage for women. Song Six concentrates on personal
selfhood: “To get married is like throwing away your own bones.” Song Seven tells
the story of a woman “defeated” by marriage, for she has lost her youth, strength,
and energy. Song Eight reminds the bride that she has to care for her mother-in-
law regardless of her own feelings. Finally, Song Nine dramatically poses the
repeated refrain “Beat her, man,” with the lines describing the husband’s violence
and the wife’s protestations of innocence.
                                                               Sarah Dupont-Mkhonza


                                           ♦

   Song One
   Oh what a beautiful hairstyle, young bride.
   You must be joking you of the King,
   I travelled until I was too tired.


   Song Two
   Subject of the King is playing.
   I walked till noon.
   I struggled, I suffered.
   My sister’s cattle.
   Oh you were beautiful, my sister.


   Song Three
   I left home justly,
   Oh yes.
   If I were you I would not be deserting my people.


                                                  Swazi Wedding Songs           ♦   461
  Come, my father’s pride.
  I have completely left my people.
  I left with my father’s approval.
  My father’s wish should be fulfilled.


  Song Four
  I have been contaminated.
  Hey you, Ngwane people, we are in trouble.
  I have touched a spear.


  Song Five
  Pick me up, my darling.
  Put me on your shoulders.
  Now I can see the heavens.


  Song Six
  I told my father, you subject of the King.
  Oh my mother, I told my father
  That to get married is like abandoning oneself.
  To get married is like throwing away your own bones.
  I even told my mother, you of the King,
  That to get married is like throwing yourself away.


  Song Seven
  I got married young.
  I do not have any energy left.
  All my energy got wasted in marriage.
  All my energy, all my strength is gone, oh my Lord.
  I got married young.
  All my strength is gone.
  Marriage has defeated me.
  All my energy is gone.
  Marriage has defeated me.


  Song Eight
  Go well, my mother’s child.
  Oh it is hard in marriage.
  Please, you must go well, my sister.
  You must take care of your mother-in-law.
  Oh it is hot in marriage.
  You must behave yourself.
  Oh it is where people grow weary.
  Oh it is so difficult; it is where one grows weary.
  You must greet your ih-laws for me.
  Oh we are tired, we are tired.


462   ♦   1990s and 2000s
Song Nine
Here is the man killing me!
(Beat her, man.)
Here is a man stunning me.
He has been misinformed.
(Beat her, man.)


Here is a man killing!
He has been informed.
(Beat her, man.)
I have tried to plead and beg.
H ere is a man stunning me.
He has been misinformed.
(Beat her, man.)
Help! help! women.
The man is beating me.
He is killing me.
(Beat her, man.)
He has been misinformed.
He was told in bed.
He is fed with stories in bed, on a pillow.
He is killing me.
(Beat her, man.)


Every day, I shield myself from big canes.
Here is a man beating me.
(Beat her, man.)
I shield myself from big canes.
The man beats me every day.
(Beat her, man.)


                                         Translated by Thulisile Motsa-Dladla




                   Communal,
       IZISHO ZOKUSEBENZA—WORK SONGS
               South Africa 1993-1994      isiZulu and isiXhosa


These work songs were performed by women laborers in the timber and sugar
plantations on the KwaZulu-Natal coast north of Durban and were collected by
me between September 1993 and August 1994. I taped and/or fdmed the women
singing and made notes describing their actions. The songs have been translated
from isiZulu and, in the case of the third item, from isiXhosa, with the help of
Lillian Sambo, Jabuliswe Masinga, Robert Sambo, and Elliot Zondi.



                                 IZISHO ZOKUSEBENZA—WORK SONGS          ♦   463
  Their singing helped the women carry out their manual labor. It was often
heavy: stripping bark off felled gum trees (“Separate These People” and “My Child
Is Crying”); removing refuse; hoeing and fertilizing the ground ready for planting
(“I’ve Been Abandoned,” “My Brother-in-Law," and “It Is This Man”); hoeing
between the rows of cane to remove weeds (“Mother Is Not Here” and “What Can
You Do?”); and cutting the cane—the latter usually men’s work.
  A strong rhythmic repetition provides the melody and shapes the interactions
between lead singer and chorus—all of which serve to sustain the women in their
arduous, monotonous work. For example, the singing of “I’ve Been Abandoned” was
almost drowned by the sound of hoes thudding into the ground, whereas “Mother
Is Not Here” is based on a lullaby that would usually be sung while the baby is
rocked in the singer’s arms. Only in some of the cane-cutting songs did their labor
seem to leave the women too breathless to sing a whole song with sustained vigor.
  While singing “My Brother-in-Law,” all the women flung down their hoes to
dance and clap in delight while in other songs, one or more of the women interrupted
her work to dance alone. On one occasion the dance was that of the traditional
ukwemula ceremony during which a girl’s readiness for marriage is announced.
  The subject matter and the mood of the women’s songs vary. During its per¬
formance, “Separate These People” developed into a mournful dirge with strong
clapping and ululating, and one woman at a time left the line of dancers to dance
what was reminiscent of a Zulu male dance. When asked about its reference, the
performers indicated the conflict between (male) African National Congress and
Inkatha factions in their community (see also “A Broken Family” in this volume).
The origins of “My Horn” are ancient for the horns of cattle carry rich symbolic
meaning in Zulu culture. The performer of this song explained that she was taught
it by her grandmother and said that the horn referred to was a musical instrument.
  While these songs accompany work in modern farming conditions, several of
them draw on much older communal work songs, such as corn-threshing songs.
The lead singer and chorus provide traditional balance between personal and com¬
munal concerns. Even if “I’ve Been Abandoned” began as a particular woman’s
complaint, its chorus shares the experience. Masking of direct confrontation also
occurs in “It Is This Man,” when the other singers join the lament and so cover a
possibly dangerous accusation against a particular man.
  A blend of gender and politics suggested by “It Is This Man” appears also in
“My Brother-in-Law” and “Separate These People.” Although rural Zulu women
have customarily been confined to a domestic sphere, their songs allow them a
spirited interaction with the larger world.
                                                                    Dianne Stewart


                                        ♦

   Song One: What Can You Do?
  What can you do to please someone?
  What can you do on this earth?
  What can you do to please someone?
  What can you do on this earth?
                            *




464   ♦   1990s AND 2000s
If you do something good, you are killed
If you do something bad, you are called a fool
Don’t forget that here on earth we do everything through the power
  of God.
Even if you kill me, you won’t achieve anything
But in the end, you too will die.


Song Two: Mother Is Not Here
Solo: Woo! child


Everyone:
Mother’s not here
She has gone to buy bread
And she hits me with it
Saying I have eaten the maas [sour milk]
But I haven’t eaten it
It’s been eaten by the dog
Granny’s dog
The spotted one     (sounds of baby crying)
The spotted one
The spotted one


Song Three: My Child Is Crying
Woman A: Wo! My child
Woman B: Is crying


A: Wo! My child
B: Eyee! . . . (crying sound)


A: Wo! My child
B: Owoo . . .
   (repeated with variations)

A: (spoken) Be quiet child, your mother is coming soon. You’ve been
  crying for a long time.


A: Wo! My child
B: Is crying
   (repeated)

A: (spoken) Where is his mother? Did you give birth to this baby?
  Where is his mother? Be quiet, child! (crying sound)
B: Keep quiet, child (crying sound)
Woman C: (gruff, impatient tone of voice) Hit him! Hit him; the child
  is crying; hit him!


                             IZISHO ZOKUSEBENZA—WORK SONGS    ♦   465
  A: Wo! My child
  B: Is crying
      (repeated)

  A: (spoken) Don’t make my brother’s child cry. Where is his mother?
      We’ll look for her at home.


  Song Four: I’ve Been Abandoned
  Woman A: I’ve been abandoned by my boyfriend
  Woman B: I’ve been abandoned by my boyfriend


  A: A lover, fit to be abandoned
     I’ve been abandoned by my boyfriend
  B: I’ve been abandoned by my boyfriend
  A: No one is sympathetic to me, abandoned by my boyfriend
  B: I’ve been deserted by my boyfriend


  A: No one loves me
      I’ve been abandoned by my boyfriend


  (Spoken, while chorus continues song)
  It’s not a sin to be abandoned, dear. He’s not the only one in the world.
      There are others more worthy than he. Go young girl and look
      for them.


  Song Five: My Brother-in-Law
  Woman A: My brother-in-law was handsome and he dressed well
  Woman B: My brother-in-law.
  A: He had only one fault, he wouldn’t pay lobola
  B: My brother-in-law.
     (repeated)


  (Spoken by one woman at end of song)
  I will never pay lobola for you because you waste your time drinking
      beer. I want someone better than you. I don’t like seeing all my money
      going to your home. I work hard but you come home late and drunk,
      having wasted time drinking, just to sleep and I’m made fun of by
      you, a loafer.


  Song Six: It Is This Man
  Woman A: There were times when we were drinking
  Woman B: There were times when we were very drunk
      (Chorus repeated five times by two singers; song follows.)

  A: It is this man


466   ♦   1990s AND 2000s
   B: It is this man
   A: My neighbour
   B: It is this man
   A: Who killed my child
      That’s why I’m experiencing hardship
      (repeated)


   A: It is this man
   B: It is this man
   A: My neighbour
      He killed my child
   He who practices witchcraft
   B: It is this man
   A: I’m afraid, I’m afraid
   B: It is this man
      Who killed my child
      (repeated)


   Song Seven: Separate These People
   Woman A: Separate these people or else they will kill one another
   Woman B: Separate them
      (repeated twenty-four times)


   Song Eight: My Horn
   Woman A: Yes, my horn
   Woman B: My horn was left on the tree.


   A: Oh! my horn
   B: My horn was left on the tree.
      (repeated at increasing speed)

                                 Transcribed and translated by Dianne Stewart




  Nadine Gordimer, APRIL                   27: The FIRST TlME
                         South Africa 1994      English


As the first South African to win the Nobel Prize for literature, Nadine Gordimer
is South Africa’s most famous writer. Her career predates, spans, and outlives
apartheid. She published her first short story in 1937 and her first collection of
stories in 1949, and had by the year 2001 written thirteen novels and over two
hundred short stories. The Nobel Prize, awarded in 1991, confirmed her interna¬
tional reputation, already established by a number of other prestigious awards,
including the James Tait Black Memorial Prize (1971), the Booker McConnell


                                            April 27: The First Time      ♦   467
Prize (joint winner in 1974), the Grand Aigle d’Or Prize (1975), and the South
African Central News Agency (CNA) Literary Award (1975 and 1991).
   Gordimer has continually used her writing, and the public voice it has afforded
her, to draw attention to the atrocities of apartheid. A founding member of the
Congress of South African Writers in 1987, she has regularly championed South
African writing, using her Nobel acceptance speech to draw attention to South
African writers who were banned or imprisoned. Three of her own novels were
banned: A World of Strangers, The Late Bourgeois World, and Burger’s Daughter.
   Gordimer was born in 1923 in Springs, a small, mostly Afrikaans-speaking,
racially segregated mining town near Johannesburg. Her parents were immigrants:
her Jewish father was from Lithuania, her mother from London. Although she has
traveled extensively, Johannesburg has always remained Gordimer’s home.
   In “April 27: The First Time,” Gordimer captures the sense of urgency that
characterized the democratic process. Given apartheid’s legacy of a high rate of
illiteracy, it is significant that Gordimer marks the crucial moment of transition
through the conflation of two critical acts: voting and writing. Characteristically
aware of her politically and socially privileged position as a white South African—
her ability to speak when others have been silenced—Gordimer thus metaphori¬
cally hands over the act of writing to the historically disenfranchised people of
South Africa.
                                                                Colette Guldimann


                                        ♦

Is there any South African for whom this day will be remembered by any
event, even the most personal, above its glowing significance as the day on
which we voted? Even for whites, all of whom have had the vote since they
were eighteen, this was the first time. This was my own overwhelming
sense of the day: the other elections, with their farcical show of a demo¬
cratic procedure restricted to whites (and, later, to everyone but the black
majority), had no meaning for any of us as South Africans-, only as a hege¬
mony of the skin.
   Standing in the queue this morning, I was aware of a sense of silent bond¬
ing. Businessmen in their jogging outfits, nurses in.uniform (two, near me,
still wearing the plastic mob-caps that cover their hair in the cloistered asep¬
sis of the operating theatre), women in their Zionist Church outfits, white
women and black women who shared the mothering of white and black chil¬
dren winding about their legs, people who had brought folding stools to sup¬
port their patient old bones, night-watchmen just off duty, girl students
tossing long hair the way horses switch their tails—here we all were as we
have never been. We have stood in line in banks and post offices together,
yes, since the desegregation of public places; but until this day there was
always the unseen difference between us, far more decisive than the differ¬
ent colours of our skins: some of us had the right that is the basis of all
rights, the symbolic X, the sign of a touch on the controls of polity, the mark
of citizenship, and others did not. But today we stood on new ground.



468   ♦   1990s and 2000s
  The abstract term “equality” took on materiality as we moved towards
the church hall polling station and the simple act, the drawing of an X,
that ended over three centuries of privilege for some, deprivation of human
dignity for others.
  The first signature of the illiterate is the X. Before that there was only
the thumb-print, the skin-impression of the powerless. I realized this with
something like awe when, assigned by my local branch of the African
National Congress to monitor procedures at a polling booth, I encountered
black people who could not read or write. A member of the Independent
Electoral Commission would guide them through what took on the solem¬
nity of a ritual: tattered identity document presented, hands outstretched
under the ultraviolet light, hands sprayed with invisible ink, and meticu¬
lously folded ballot paper—a missive ready to be despatched for the
future   placed in those hands. Then an uncertain few steps towards a
booth, accompanied by the IEC person and one of the party agents to
make sure that when the voter said which party he or she wished to vote
for the X would be placed in the appropriate square. Several times I was
that party agent and witnessed a man or woman giving this signature to
citizenship. A strange moment: the first time man scratched the mark of
his identity, the conscious proof of his existence, on a stone must have been
rather like this.
   Of course nearby in city streets there were still destitute black children
sniffing glue as the only substitute for nourishment and care; there were
homeless families existing in rigged-up shelters in the crannies of the city.
The law places the ground of equality underfoot; it did not feed the hun¬
gry or put up a roof over the head of the homeless, today, but it changed
the base on which South African society was for so long built. The poor
are still there, round the corner. But they are not The Outcast. They no
longer can be decreed to be forcibly removed, deprived of land, and of the
opportunity to change their lives. They count. The meaning of the count¬
ing of the vote, whoever wins the majority, is this, and not just the calcu¬
lation of the contents of ballot boxes.
  If to be alive on this day was not Wordsworth’s “very heaven” for those
who have been crushed to the level of wretchedness by the decades of
apartheid and the other structures of racism that preceded it, if they could
not experience the euphoria I shared, standing in line, to be living at this
hour has been extraordinary. The day has been captured for me by the men
and women who couldn’t read or write, but underwrote it, at last, with
their kind of signature. May it be the seal on the end of illiteracy, of the
pain of imposed ignorance, of the deprivation of the fullness of life.




                                          April 27: The First Time    ♦   469
                     Mpho \M’atsepo Nthunya,
                    Before the Beginning
                              Lesotho 1996       English


Mpho ’M’atsepo Nthunya’s father, like so many Basotho men, was forced to leave
Lesotho to find employment. He was in Johannesburg working in a factory when
she was born. His infrequent visits ceased when she was a very small child, and by
the time she was seven, she and her mother were wearing sacks and eating grass
and insects. Her devout Roman Catholic mother told her to “sing the hunger
away.” Then in 1938, when she was eight, her father sent for his family. In a town¬
ship outside Johannesburg, Nthunya attended a mission school, progressed
through eight years as a star student, learned seven languages, and began writing.
After her marriage, she returned to Lesotho and lived in the mountains, where she
found “the education of books was useless.” In her long life she bore nine children,
ran a large and successful farm, and took domestic work after her husband died.
   She developed as a storyteller, a keeper of oral traditions, and an elder in a large
family that embraces people of all classes. In 1992 she began telling her life stories to
me when I was visiting as a Fulbright scholar from the United States; I transcribed and
typed them for her and served as copy editor. Those stories were published in South
Africa, the United States, and the United Kingdom as Singing away the Hunger.
                                                        Kathryn Limakatso Kendall


                                           ♦


I was married with a good Mosotho man, and we left Benoni and lived in
the Maluti Mountains where we had many children, raised sheep, grew
maize, and listened to the quiet. At the beginning we were hungry and our
children were hungry; but after many years of working hard we were no
longer poor. We had many animals and fields. Then my husband died, and
I had to come back to my mother’s home, in the Rorqa Valley, to find work.
I lost or sold the animals and left the fields and my houses in the moun¬
tains. Now I live in Mafikeng, the village at the gates of the National
University of Lesotho. I have worked at the University cleaning houses
since 1968. It is at the University that I meet Limakatso, I call her mot-
soalle oa ka, my very good friend. I tell her my stories and she writes them
down in a computer to make them a book. Mohlolol [Miracle!]
   Talking to Limakatso, I remember many things which I forgot for a long
time. This is a good thing for me. I’m looking back, and it’s like looking at
an album of photos from my whole life. If other people can look at it too,
that’s fine. But it’s my album, and it pleases me to look at it. I’m telling sto¬
ries for children and grovyn people in other places, because I want people
who know how to read and have time to read, to know something about the



470   ♦   1990s and 2000s
Basotho     how we used to live and how we live now, how poor we are, and
how we are living together in this place called Lesotho. I’m also telling sto¬
ries for Basotho like my grandchildren, who read books but don’t know the
old ways of their own people. If they can read these stories, maybe it will
teach them where they come from. And maybe it can help them to learn
English, so they can find work.
   I tell these stories in English to my motsoalle so she can write them in
the computer. I can tell these stories better in Sesotho. When I tell stories
in Sesotho, the words roll like a music I am singing with my heart. When
I speak Sekhooa, the white people’s language, I start and stop. I stare at my
motsoalle, at the ceiling, looking, looking. I say, “What can I say? What is
the word for this?”
   I am like a car trying to start on a cold morning, coughing and stopping.
Limakatso says people who read Sekhooa never get to hear the stories from
women like me, and I think it must be true. When would we write them?
I have only a Standard Five education, went to Standard Six for a little
while but didn’t finish it. I don’t know the people who publish books, don’t
know where to send a book if I could write it. Limakatso says people are
hungry for these stories. They want to know. So I say, “Ho lokile. Fine. It’s
OK with me. We can write them.” Maybe I make a little bit of money to
buy maize meal for the children.
   I try to imagine what I can do with a book written by me. I think of my
mother. I imagine that I can give this book of English words to her, and
because of the wisdom of Heaven she can read it. I say to her, “Take this
book and see your story: when you were married, and what happened to
your daughter, who always loves you. Here are the stories of your daugh¬
ter’s children, and their children. None of this would be, without you. And
now others can know your story.” So I say this book is my album for my
mother, Valeria ’M’amahlaku Sekobi Lillane, who passed away. Others can
look at it if they like.


                                     Transcribed by Kathryn Limakatso Kendall




Ellen Ndeshi Namhila, The PRICE OF FREEDOM
                            Namibia 1997       English


Ellen Ndeshi Namhila left Namibia in 1976 at the age of twelve and returned
nineteen years later to vote in the first independent elections. She fled the inten¬
sifying war waged by the South African Defence Force in northern Namibia
against the South West African People’s Organization. Namhila’s experience was
typical of the many thousands of Namibians who went into exile during the liber¬
ation struggle that culminated in Namibia’s independence in March 1990.




                                               The Price of Freedom         ♦   471
   Namhila’s long years of exile, during which she lived in Angola, Zambia, the
Gambia, and Finland, were marked by the corrosive insecurity of being a refugee,
denied the power of making decisions about the course of her life. Her autobiogra¬
phy, published in 1997, is the first book about exile and return written by a
Namibian woman. Her experiences also reflect the experiences of female refugees
from South Africa and Zimbabwe. Much heartache and many small personal tri¬
umphs have been lost in the euphoric focus on the future that followed liberation
and independence. In many cases women were expected to revert to subordinate
social roles, something unacceptable to most after their experience either as com¬
batants or as independent equals during the struggle. The Price of Freedom describes
the events of exile, but it also explores the difficulties faced by women when they
return to the longed-for utopia. Reconciling the complex relationships among gen¬
der, nationalism, and memory prompted Namhila to write her book:


  When we were in exile, in the struggle, in the refugee camps and in foreign
   countries, I did not question my national identity. I felt strongly Namibian.
   I wanted to return home to Namibia, so that I could reclaim my identity, and
   my rightful place in society, having lost all my childhood during the long,
   long years of the apartheid war. While I was in exile I remembered home
   through things I had known. Now that I am in Namibia all that I knew of
   Namibia, of home, has changed. I am finding myself lost in my own coun¬
   try. ... If I am lost, if my past is lost amongst historical events over which I
   have no control, who then shall make or remake my history?
                                                                       Margie Orford


                                          ♦


It was an early Sunday morning in April 1976, my heart was heavy, but in
my head I could hear sounds of early morning birds wishing me a safe
journey. I was determined to leave Namibia. I silently slipped out of the
homestead, walked across the military camp to the pastor’s homestead,
where my friend lived. We quickly joined the others in the nearby forest at
Eenhana, where we were briefed by two unknown men about how to get to
the heavily guarded and fenced border between Namibia and Angola. They
told us where we would spend the night, get food and what to tell those
who might ask where we were heading.
   It took us a whole day and a half to get to a South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO) transit homestead near the Angolan border where
we spent a week. Here we were joined by other people. My friend, Maria,
and I were the youngest in the group. One evening, our host told us that it
would be better for us to go back home. He said we were too young to face
the journey especially as there was war in Angola. He also told us if we
were to go on that when we would get there we would have no role to play
except to act as wives to the soldiers in the bush. This prospect so terrified
us that we even considered taking his advice. I was twelve years old.
   Our lives in the villagd had been turned upside down since the arrival of
the South African Defence Force (SADF) military camp at the village at


472   ♦   1990s and 2000s
the end of 1975. Many young people had fled the country in order to
organize themselves for the liberation struggle. Even though it was not
publicly discussed, it was known that these young people would one day
come back to liberate the country. It was believed that those who left the
country would eventually come back. But no-one was certain about this.
  I did not discuss my plans to go into exile with my parents or any of my
relatives. I kept my plans a tight secret between me and Maria, who
informed me about her brothers’ plans to leave the country and asked
whether I was interested to join them. I had always wanted to escape from
the repression, so I thought this was my opportunity to do so.
   The reasons for keeping these plans away from my family were several.
I was very young, and I doubted whether my family would have allowed me
to leave. This journey was a risk to the whole family. Families of those who
went into exile were always targeted for arrest and interrogation whenever
the SADF fancied they were getting threats from the local people. For
example, tate Haimbala ya Shixungileni was arrested on several occasions
and forced to reveal information on the whereabouts of his brother Kambo
ka Shixungileni who went into exile in the 1960s. By leaving the country I
knew I might be leaving trouble for my family. But, as will be told later, I
had been shot at, had seen my teachers being violated, and had witnessed
my uncle being beaten half to death and many other atrocities committed
against people who had done nothing wrong. The memory of violence
committed against innocent people at my village was still so fresh in my
mind that I decided anything, marriage to soldiers included, was better
than what we might go through if we returned to Eenhana. We were wor¬
ried that the information about our escape had already leaked out of the
village to the SADF base. And what they might do to us, knowing that we
were escaping from their repressive system, and the example they might
make of us so terrified us that we decided to continue our journey into the
unknown.
  We were woken at three o’clock the next morning and led by five huge
men to the Angolan border. We walked and walked through the Angolan
villages and forests for three days and when we got really tired, the soldiers
asked us to rest. For part of this journey I was carried on the shoulders of
the soldiers and older men from our group. In some areas it was possible
to walk only during the evening and early mornings.
   We were advised to always walk two metres apart following in the foot¬
steps of the person in front. This we were told was important for two reasons:
if the enemy troops were following us, they would have a hard time estimat¬
ing how many people we were if we all walked in single file. Secondly, there
were lots of unexploded anti-personnel land mines planted by National
Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) and the SADF before
they left Angola in 1975. By walking in single file we were minimizing the
risk of detonating the land mines, we were told. We were also told to speak
softly and never to raise our voices when we were laughing.


                                            The Price of Freedom       ♦   473
      I noticed that in most of the Angolan villages we walked through, the
homesteads were burned down and what remained were ashes and charred
poles. The danger was obvious. In some areas the soldiers told us to strictly
follow their orders, which were: to keep two metres’ distance, and keep
silent; while in some areas where the enemy’s activities were unlikely they
just kept quiet.
   During the journey, we survived on drinking water from the soldiers
which they carried in small green bags around the waist. The soldiers
advised us not to drink from any open water or at least to first make sure
that there were living insects inside the water before drinking it or wash¬
ing ourselves with it. Among the open water we came across there was a
dam which had thousands of dead insects washed ashore. The soldiers told
us that this dam had been poisoned by the enemy and any humans who
drank its water would die just like the insects.
   As soon as we arrived at a resting place, we all dropped to the ground
and rested. While we were resting, three of the soldiers would disappear
and after a while return with food and water. Sometimes they would ask
some of us to assist in carrying the food from the Angolan homes to the
bush. These meals mainly consisted of oshifima, a thick porridge made of
millet flour, which was served with evanda (dried spinach). In some places
we were served oshikundu (a drink made from millet). This food must have
been collected from several homesteads and brought to us in the bush
because it was too much for one household to prepare at short notice. The
two soldiers who remained with us did not rest but walked up and down in
a circle around us. They did not talk much to each other either and when
they did, they kind of whispered.
  When night fell, the soldiers took us to a homestead where we spent the
night. They advised us to avoid making unnecessary noise or being seen
outside the homestead. This, they said, was important for our own security.
Then they disappeared.
  In homesteads where we arrived during the day, the Angolans obliter¬
ated the traces of our footsteps by herding the cattle or goats over them or
by sweeping the way we had come with sticks.           '
  We walked for three days through Angola before we reached a place
where we spent our first three months. It was a SWAPO military camp,
from which People’s Liberation Army of Namibia (PLAN) fighters were
given missions into Namibia. This was the first time we saw our soldiers,
black soldiers with guns and in military uniforms. As darkness approached
I wondered where we would spend the night. The man who spoke to us on
arrival told us that we had committed ourselves to a very difficult struggle,
that of liberating Namibia. Some of the difficulties he mentioned were
hunger, thirst, and sacrifice and dedicating of our lives to the bitter but just
struggle which would cost lives. This struggle needed unity and comrade¬
ship, as a slogan said:  '



474    ♦   1990s and 2000s
                         SWAPO
                         Will Win
                         Namibia
                         Will Be Free
                         Everything for the Struggle
                         All for Victory


  Slogans like this were not just slogans; they were a meaningful social
and political force that mobilized the people and their dedication to the
struggle. As soon as the commander uttered the last word of Everything
for the Struggle, every soldier responded vigorously All for Victory giving
a power salute and breaking into a revolutionary song. The atmosphere at
the parade got electrified. I was inspired by their style of singing and act¬
ing like free and liberated minds. At that point, I carefully watched the sol¬
diers, thinking this was probably the time for them to disappear or
magically turn into objects, as I had heard in stories told back home. But
to my disappointment the parade ended and no-one turned into an object.
   Later on, some combatants spoke to us briefly but they did not shoot at us
or beat us up like the South West Africa Territory Force (SWATF) did to
people in villages back home. The combatants were busy all day long and we
onlv met them sometimes during meals. Maria and I were afraid to enter into
any discussions with them because we had been warned that our role as girls
would only be to act as wives to them. Time went on and none of the soldiers
spoke to us about marriage, so the fear of becoming a wife to someone began
to fade away from my head. The atmosphere was also very reassuring.
   I noticed that all the soldiers wore broad belts, and wondered why. I con¬
cluded that they were probably meant to reduce their stomachs so that they
could stay for long periods without food or drink. I was surprised that the camp
gave us three square meals a day and yet I never saw where the food was pre¬
pared. There were no pots and no kitchen, but there was always something to
eat. When we left the camp we still did not know where the soldiers got their
food from. Later on I found out that food was [carried] in by the Angolan civil¬
ians. There was a point where the soldiers fetched it and brought it to us.
   One morning we were told to pack up and get ready to leave for another
camp far away from the Angolan border. In this camp we found girls
among the male soldiers who were also dressed in military uniform and
carrying guns. They made a very big impression on me. I thought it was
fascinating and I wished I could be one of them. They looked so brave,
beautiful and healthy. They spoke different languages.
  I had until then not been aware that there were other language groups
in Namibia besides Oshiwambo to which I belonged. This was the first
time that I had left Ovambo. I was born and raised in Ovambo where
everyone spoke Oshiwambo and I never had the opportunity to live with
non-Oshiwambo speakers.
  This is how my nineteen years in exile started.


                                             The Price of Freedom        ♦   475
  Colette Mutangadura, NGONYA’S BRIDE-PRICE
                            Zimbabwe 1997       English


Colette Mutangadura was born in 1945, is married, and has five children. She is a
primary school teacher and a member of Zimbabwe Women Writers. Mutanga¬
dura is actively involved in promoting reading and writing among women in
Goromonzi district where she teaches. She wrote her only published novel in
Shona, Rinonyenga Rinohwarara (The Duplicity of Desire), in 1983. The novel’s
central character divorces her husband and successfully raises her children.
   Mutangadura’s grandmother, Ngonya, was born in 1900 in what later became
the Murewa Communal Lands. Mutangadura’s mother, Ndati Christina, remem¬
bers her mother as a very beautiful woman. This story of grandmother Ngonya was
told to Mutangadura by her mother and her great-aunt Ndakatukwa.
   “Ngonya’s Bride-Price” is unusual in that it was kept alive for three generations
and will survive for longer in print. Thus Mutangadura has successfully bridged the
gap between oral and written stories as she preserves some of her family history.
                                                                Chiedza Musengezi
                                        ♦

Ngonya was my maternal grandmother, born in 1900 in what later became the
Murehwa Communal Lands. My mother; Ndati Christina, remembers her as a
very beautiful woman, and I can well believe that, for my mother was herself
one of those who could make men turn their heads as she passed, and one can still
see her beauty, though she is now 76 years old. This story of my grandmother's
short life was told to me by my mother and by Ndakatukwa, my great aunt.
  When Ngonya was sixteen a white farmer called Jan settled on land that
her family had farmed, making them move their home some considerable
distance away to the south near a hill that was known as Matungamhara.
This white farmer would send his foreman to their new home and to all the
surrounding villages to recruit labour when there was a lot of work to be
done on the land. In the beginning only the men went, while their women¬
folk carried on with the endless daily tasks of collecting firewood, fetching
water, gathering fruits, weeding crops, and looking after their children. But
in the summer of 1917 the white farmer had a bumper harvest and so he
compelled all those who could work to come to the farm to help bring in
his crop, leaving only the old women and the young children at home.
  Ngonya was rather pleased by this demand for her labour, for her elder
brother Gadzai had for some time been working there and bringing home
cloth and sugar and other goods for his wages, and so Ngonya thought that
she too would get some of these things that she so much desired, especially
cloth. She wanted to replace her wrap-over skin skirt with one of cloth.
Like all the girls she wanted a change because she believed that she would
look much prettier in such a skirt.

476   ♦   1990s and 2000s
  The work was hard and the farmer, Jan, though young, was a harsh mas¬
ter. He used to give out the wages himself. The usual wage for 30 days
work was two yards of material, a sixpence, and a cupful of sugar which was
poured into the worker’s piece of cloth. When it was Ngonya’s turn to
receive her wages he winked at her, put out his tongue, and said, “Yah, iri
mushe here" (Are you all right?). She was afraid and would rather not have
been noticed. Still, she continued working for him, through the harvest
and then into the following season of sowing and weeding, and during that
time she brought home more wages than the other workers. Jan would pat
her on the shoulder and give her names she didn’t understand, and alto¬
gether make her feel puzzled and fearful by such attentions.
   One Friday afternoon he came to the fields, collected three of the girls
including Ngonya, and said in Chilapalapa that he wanted them to help the
houseboy. When they arrived at the house two of the girls were given jobs
to do outside, but he took Ngonya inside. Jan was married but his wife was
not there, and Ngonya learnt afterwards that she was in the maternity hos¬
pital in Salisbury. He stood close to her and touched her, gently caressing
her back, her neck and breasts. She wanted to scream, but at the same time
felt so weak, as though her whole body were melting under his fingers. He
lifted and carried her to a room and laid her on a big brass bed, and there,
pressing his lips against hers, thrusting his tongue into her mouth, he made
love to her while the setting sun streamed through the window. She had
many things to take home that day, but she looked so unhappy that when
her mother commented on it she had to pretend to be feeling sick.
   She didn’t go to work the next day. Jan sent a messenger to say that she
was needed on Monday, and Ngonya, remembering stories her father had
told her of the savagery of the whites in the Chimurenga of 1896, was so
fearful that the white man would act violently against her family that she
agreed to go. But now she no longer worked in the fields. While Jan’s wife
was still away, he made love to her on Madam’s bed, and when the Missis,
as they called her, returned with her baby he continued his affair with
Ngonya in the barn, the milk shed, or even in the bush. He was a gentle
lover, never rough in either word or action, and sometimes he would bring
her a cool sweet drink. And so things went on for four months until the
fact of Ngonya’s pregnancy could no longer be concealed.
   She told her aunt and mother that the white man was the father of the
child she was carrying, and they of course were greatly shocked to learn that
a thing which they thought of as taboo had occurred. Her mother attempted
to commit suicide but was prevented by women who told her that times were
changing, and it was not only her daughter who would soon be holding a
white man’s baby on her lap. Many more would fall prey to them. Her father
was furious and said she deserved to die. So it was secretly arranged by the
family that Ngonya should go to an aunt in Chikore in Manicaland province
with the message that the child, when born, had to be killed, for they feared
the appearance of a child with a white skin among them.


                                            Ngonya’s Bride-Price      ♦   477
      When a whole week had gone by and Ngonya had not reported for work at
the farm house, the white man sent his foreman to tell her that she must come,
and when there was no response to this summons, Jan himself came one
morning riding on a black horse. He fired his gun into the air and demanded
to see Ngonya. People slid into their huts and peered out fearfully through the
cracks. Ngonya’s father, Munbenga, came out and talked with the white man,
promising him that she would return in a short while. But she didn’t, and so
one chilly morning a very angry Jan came again calling for Ngonya. He had
brought men with him, and when she didn’t appear, he ordered his men to
open the cattle kraals and drive the cattle to his farm. He shouted that if
Ngonya did not come back to him, then their cattle would be forfeited.
      Everyone was angered by the white man’s behaviour, and at a loss to explain
it too, since by rights he should have come with a gift of cattle, a bride-price,
to the father for the girl he had taken and made pregnant, yet here he was
insulting everyone and taking not only his girlfriend’s father’s cattle but those
of others in the family too. Ngonya’s grandmother ran into the cloud of dust
raised by the cattle and Jan’s horse, so that men had to chase after her to bring
her back out of danger, promising to recover the beasts by some means or other.
She cried aloud to her ancestors, lamenting her granddaughter’s conduct.


   My ancestors! You have brought doom to my son through his feather¬
      brained daughter. How could she have opened her legs to that frightening
      creature? Oh, how could she have looked into those fearful eyes? Was it
   sugar that made you let that beast lie on your breast Ngonya? Ngonya, my
  granddaughter, you are a disgrace to all the family. You have brought dis¬
  grace on all the women of our clan, Ngonya, my granddaughter, Ngonya.
  Now that the cattle for spiritual sacrifices are taken away, with what shall
  I appease the spirits of my ancestors, Ngonya?


  The old woman spent the whole day lamenting and blaming the white
man, calling him all sorts of names, boer, oppressor, thief, racist, and so on.
And Ngonya’s mother cried too until she could cry no more. People had to
guard her because she was still thinking of committtng suicide.
  And people also gossiped—at the well, in the bush, even enemies spoke
together of this thing that had happened. Ngonya was the talk of that day,
and that day stretched into weeks.
  Her father, who was the headman of the village, called a meeting of the
elders. These men met together under a big muhacha tree, the usual place for
taking counsel on the affairs of the village. They talked and talked but they
couldn’t find a solution to the problem of retrieving their cattle from the
boer, as he was now called by nearly all. They finally decided to report their
case to the Native Commissioner. This they did, but nothing happened.
They waited for weeks, and then months, but there was still no response. So
they consulted their spirit' medium who advised them to take their cattle
from Jan’s farm and move away from the district, and this is what they


478     ♦   1990s and 2000s
decided to do. The men went off for several months to build a new village
some thirty miles away, beyond the mountains near the Munyuki river. There
they erected new huts and then the women and children moved in to plas¬
ter the walls and beat the floors. They liked the new place because of its
nearness to water, and agreed that their ancestors had guided them well.
   Two weeks went by, and then, by night and in collaboration with some of
Jan’s farm workers, the men drove all their own cattle out of the farm together
with twenty from the boer’s herd which they declared was the lobola, the
bride-price, for Ngonya. As they began the long journey to their new home
the rains poured behind them obliterating their tracks, and after four days,
crossing several flooded rivers, they reached their new village where they gave
thanks to the ancestors for protecting them from pursuit. Days went by, then
weeks, months, and finally a whole year. The boer did not show up.
   One autumn afternoon the aunt from Chikore arrived with Ngonya and
her baby son. Many of the men of the village were away hunting, and some
of the women too were out seeking fruits and vegetables along the river
valley. But Ngonya’s mother was at home. She had been feeling tired and
had told friends that she thought she might have a visitor arriving or be
about to hear some bad news. As it turned out her visitor was her only
daughter carrying her first coloured grandson and she was overcome with
joy at seeing the two. This made things somewhat easier for Aunt Nyatahwa
who explained how she had not killed the child as the family had asked
because she was beginning to go to church.
   What was really surprising was how Ngonya’s father took to the baby. He
was very proud of his grandson. There was of course gossip. Some said the
child’s name should have been Sugar instead of Andris because Ngonya had
thrown herself on the boer for it. For her part Ngonya had been heard to say
that Jan might come by one day, and with that in mind she washed little
Andris twice a day instead of the customary once a week, for she said he would
want to find his boy clean. Andris was a great joy to her, and neither he nor
the children he grew up with took any notice of his difference in colour.
   Ngonya eventually maried Mudzingi, my grandfather, in 1922 and gave
birth to my mother, Ndati, that same year. In 1925 she bore a son who died
and she herself died shortly afterwards. Jan had never re-appeared. Her father,
my great-grandfather, was said to boast of her that she had enriched him with
a bride-price of ten head of cattle from Mudzingi but with twenty from Jan.



          Sheila Masote, TESTIMONY:
  Truth and Reconciliation Commission
                         South Africa 1997     English


The excerpt below is from testimony given by Sheila Masote at a human rights vio¬
lations hearing of the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission. The
commission was an important component in South Africa’s democratic transition.


                          Truth and Reconciliation Commission            ♦   479
Established in law and offering a form of justice frequently described as “restorative,”
its tasks were fourfold. It was to compile a report that documented the nature, cause,
and extent of gross violations of human rights committed between 1960 and 1994; to
offer a limited amnesty; to identify the fate and whereabouts of victims; and to make
recommendations on reparations and rehabilitation. In terms of the Act that brought
the commission into being, victims were entitled “to relate their own accounts of the
violations of which they are victims,” that is, to tell their own stories of harm.
   Approximately ten percent of the deponents who gave statements concerning
killing, torture, abduction, and severe ill-treatment were invited to testify in seventy-
six public hearings held across the country in 1996 and 1997. Simultaneously trans¬
lated into the main languages in each area where hearings were held, the hearings
were also widely broadcast in South Africa and beyond.
      Public hearings were emotional events. Testifiers—victims, their families, and
friends—described the full range of violations that the commission’s operational
definitions admitted, including terrible torture, injuries, and death. They also
evoked the everyday humiliations of apartheid and a diversity of harms that the
commission did not consider gross violations of human rights. Early in the hearings
process, marked patterns emerged, most pronounced of which was the tendency for
women to testify mainly about the experiences of men, usually their sons or hus¬
bands. Concerned about the absence of women’s own experiences of gross violations
and bodily harm, the commission instituted special hearings on women that were
held in Cape Town, Johannesburg, and Durban.
   Sheila Masote was the first witness to testify before the Women’s Hearings held
in Johannesburg in July 1997. Describing her life as a well-educated child in a cul¬
tured family, her fractured testimony suggests the range and consequences of
apartheid’s harm and the effects of the struggle against it on individuals and fam¬
ilies. Like many other women who testified, she lamented diverse losses: opportu¬
nities; status and community trust; extended family networks and the support they
offered. Her testimony describes the narrowed scope of sociality in the face of state
violence and political engagement, while her description of family life affords a
glimpse of the devastating effects of surveillance and brutality: families stretched
to the breaking point; violence that feeds inward and endures. Unlike other women
who gave accounts, Masote explicitly rejected the role of representing her family.
Her account details her own experiences, including the effects of patriarchal rela¬
tions, and speaks to the difficulties of maintaining both family relations and a
coherent personal identity in conditions she characterizes as “my crumbled world.”
   Her strength in overcoming such conditions is evidenced in both her testimony
and her current activities. She is now the director of the African Cultural Organi¬
zation of South Africa, an organization that uses music and cultural activities to
inspire youth from disadvantaged communities. She is also director of the
Orchestra Company in Johannesburg. In 2000, she was a nominee for the Shoprite-
Checkers South African Woman of the Year Award.
                                                                             Fiona Ross


                                           ♦

On the programme it says I’m here to speak about—on behalf of—the
family. No, that is not what I am here about. My mother has put in a sub¬
mission as an individual and representing the family.

480     ♦   1990s and 2000s
  I then felt, yes, I’m part of the family, but I refuse to be family and have
no identity as Sheila. The problem that I have always suffered and 1 have
always said to myself is that I don’t seem to be having an identity like
belonging to me. I’m always either Zeph’s daughter, Mothopeng’s daugh¬
ter or Mike Masote’s wife. Or Neo Masote’s mother and Zeph Masote’s
mother. But no, I feel I am me. And this is why I am here.
  As a little girl, as a teenager, as a woman, as a mother and as a builder
and as somebody who has really contributed to the struggle, I may not have
been seen in the forefront, but sometimes I believe they also serve who
only stand and wait.
   Therefore I—it’s such a big story that I have. It’s a long life. I am 52
years old and most of it I have been born in a family that’s been through
the struggle. And I should be presenting a statement, maybe this big. I
know others are as big as this room, but mine has also formed a part.
  But I tried to summarise here in picture form, because so that I keep
in focus. I have here some of what I was stripped of. And I have a ball,
representing my crumbled world. [She shows an illustration of a ball; a
nd then another of it crumbled; and a third, in the shape of a heart, of
repairing.]
  I was born in a very, very up family; my father and my mother both
teachers of those days, the Royal Readers, the best and they stayed in the
best place. When so it had started, it was not so. It was Orlando-East and
then into Orlando-West. And this is the elite. This is where you find the
Mandelas, the Sisulus, the Mathews, etc. [. . .]
  I start with the late Zeph Mothopeng. My father was a cultural man. He
was the first president of the TATA—the then Transvaal African Teachers’
Associ-ation, which later became TUATA (Transvaal Union of African
Teachers      Association).   He   was   the   first   chairperson   of the    then
Johannesburg Bantu Music Festival, that has               brought forth   all this
Eisteddfod, all the culture that you see, the coming up of Dorkay House.
  During those days, it happened right in Orlando West, musicals and all
that. Em trying to show, my mother herself has been a teacher, a conduc¬
tor, a singer with the coloratura soprano voice type. You may wonder why
I—where I get these tales from. Em highly cultured and I need no apolo¬
gies; I am—I am married to a highly cultured man. The only man, the only
black in Africa who holds a licenciate in violin teaching. [. . .]
  Now, I want to tell you; my mother still runs a choir of children, young
girls. They’re called the Nightingales. They started way back in the fifties,
1952 she says. It’s a community programme. All of us, the Barbaras, the
Sisi Ntombis, they have come through this choir and have passed. [. . .]
  Now, I am saying to you, my crumbling world was—I had a family that
was a home and togetherness. My school work suffered a lot, because I had
a lot to carry on me. I couldn’t study, I couldn’t be worried about my
dreams. I needed to be a lawyer, at one time to be a social worker. Yes, a
teacher, because you would look up to your mother or your father.


                          Truth and Reconciliation Commission              ♦    481
      I had no trust at that stage. It went. The church, I couldn’t trust, because
I didn’t belong. Why all this happening to my family? Why all this hap¬
pening to Orlando West? My friends and my neighbours, they got away
from me, because the Special Branch always came to my home. They
harassed my family. They went to the family, to the neighbours, to the chil¬
dren I played with and they threatened their parents. [. . .]
   I come to my family’s breaking. The main thing was society. I would also
say this communal living—I could go to granny next door, I could go to
Memama. And I knew I would find help. If there was no milk at home, it
was easy for us to go and ask for it. Or just to visit and play next door. I
knew I’d come back healthy and well and well fed.
      My mother would go work and she knows her children are safe. Our
keys, door key, would stay at the third house from your house. Next time the
next house. Nobody would come and steal. Everybody would look after it.
    But all that crumbled, because the Special Branch had to come in and
tell people, these are terrorists. You dare be seen associated. And then my
family, that is my whole family. Then my father got dismissed. When they
did the introduction of Bantu Education, joblessness came and my mother
had to follow suit, lose her teaching post, because she can’t go and work for
the system when her husband has been unfairly dismissed.
   My extended family, they started fearing us. My brother went into exile.
There was loneliness. There was non-stop harassment by the Special
Branch. There was a series of imprisonment. . . .
   My mother was very frustrated, unsupported and lonely. In all this, all
this torture, I have the world and my family and down there is a big load.
And there was me as a girl child.
   I won’t read through my story. I have it on paper, but I would like to say
with all that, I used to go for ballet, I used to sing, I was a little girl in tutus,
ribbons, pretty little thing; the only daughter of a well-off family. [. . .]
   And it all went, because when ballet was stopped for black little kids. [. . .]
I resorted to ballroom dancing. Then that’s where my conflict with my mother
started—I love my mother and I would like to say to you people what I’m
mainly saying and that even my daughter there is Worried. And I’ve come
along with my mother and she has suffered and I’m not trying to be—we’re
just trying to show the suffering we went through together.
   I have seen my mother break down. I have seen my mother when she did
least expect it that I know, crying, sobbing. I had questions as a daughter.
Mom, what’s happening?
   Then PAC’s [Pan African Congress’s] policy was that women should
stay at home, should not participate. [. . .] It was all by way of trying to say
when we [men] go out to jail, when we go out and be killed, you look after
the children.
   So my mother was always there for myself and brothers. So I would
always say, Mama, what is happening? And they were not told. The hus¬
bands wouldn’t share much. And therefore this started to make me angry,


482     ♦   1990s AND 2000s
because I didn’t understand then; have an attitude towards my mother.
Why, why doesn’t she share with me? Why doesn’t she understand me?
Why does she beat me up so much? Why?
  Because she was frustrated. And I was the only one close to home. My
brothers turned to, like boys would have it easier maybe, they would go to
bands, play, they started the All-Rounders, an all blind band that started in
the sixties, seventies and later on they formed Batsumi (a jazz band). They
have been outward-going. I was always at home, looking after my mother.
   She started to be sick. She would be going to hospital in sessions. I
would be the sole person in the house, exposed to, if people wanted to rape
me. Fortunately it hasn’t happened to me. It almost nearly happened, but
never happened.
  There were other things, traumas that I had. My home was now very
cold, very needy, very—no friends. Except a few friends, later on, that did
come onto the scene. I went to school with her, among other things. And
she was supportive to me in many ways. I’m not saying everybody moved
out, but I’m saying the world crumbled.
   I would like to say, my adult life—all this time there was—the police, I
think, have always thought I’m the strong one of the family. Yes, I look
weak outside, but yes, I am very strong. I have carried a lot. I’ve carried even
things for my mother. Even when she wasn’t aware, I was carrying for her.
   Sometimes I wasn’t even in her way. I remember even when my father
was very sick, terminally ill, when he was released from prison. To my
mother I looked like I don’t know my role. I am forward.
   But she was very sickly, because of her hip transplant. But because she’s
also a firm and strong woman, we had to be hitting against one another.
And I had to put my foot down now and again. She had to be swearing at
me. It was very clumsy and some scars are deep. [. . .] When my mother
wanted to bash somebody, it was me. I must say I have been very much
abused; by stick, by mouth, by just non-performance, maybe by denials of
my rights as a child, which I may not go deep, because maybe people may
think I’m ungrateful.
   But because I’m sitting here with her, I see this as a chance that out
there, like I am here to represent other children that want to speak, but
maybe think it improper as we are socialised as girls and women we must
be quiet. . . . She was breaking the very family she was trying to keep
together.
   And this I carried along even into my married life. I also bashed my son.
I almost killed my son. Today he’s in Switzerland. He is the finest cellist
and the Lord dear hold the man in school. I’m trying to show you how cul¬
tured we are.
   But the sister at the age of about eight, saw him go up; he was about six,
trying to hang himself in a tree when we were staying in Phefeni. Because
I used to bash my son for no reason and often. . . . That is what used to
happened to me, my friends, I would beat him. I would beat him. I dont


                          Truth and Reconciliation Commission            ♦   483
know what for. I would beat him until my neighbours jump over the fence:
“Sheila, you’ll kill the boy, Sheila.”
      That is what my son went through. I went through the same. I did it. I
don’t know what it is I haven’t done. I have done lots to my daughter.
Today she is a lawyer. I’m trying to—I’m not boasting, I’m showing when
you have the will to live you can beat the worst of forces. . . .
      Grannies, where are you? Little girls, where are you? Who tells about
mysteries? And who tells you about what’s happening? Do we still tell sto¬
ries to our children? That’s what has happened. My children can tell.




          Keamogets'we Kwere and Lesie Kwere,
        We Will Be Leasing for Ourselves
                        Botswana 1997-1998         Setswana


There is no universally accepted term for the historically marginalized people of
mainly Khoesan-speaking origins. The people of Khwai refer to themselves vari¬
ously as Bugakhwe or Basarwa. The Khwai people moved to what the Kwere sis¬
ters refer to as “old Khwai” in the 1920s and 1930s. At that time, they occupied a
territory much larger than that to which they are now confined. In recent times,
they have been displaced again and their way of life substantially interfered with
by conservation policies, which, for example, limit hunting to particular species
and particular times of the year.
   The Khwai people find their traditional way of life undermined both by tourism
and wildlife interests and by other (non-Basarwa) groups in the region. The wildlife
industry tends to disregard them altogether, but even when indigenous land rights
are acknowledged, permanency of settlement has assumed greater rhetorical signif¬
icance than antiquity of occupation. Here the Basarwa suffer from the widespread
(though academically contested) perception that they were historically “nomadic”
and so never really settled anywhere. Additionally, non-Basarwa local communities
are sometimes in conflict for resources; however, they usually recognize the primacy
of Basarwa occupancy and the history of social and econopic ties.
   Clearly, the Basarwa’s existence as a community has always been under threat, but
the new strategies open to them are few and limited in scope. Their main source of
income is restricted to collecting and selling grass and reed for thatching roofs.
Basketry now forms part of their economic activity, and women have mobilized
themselves to build a curio shop to sell their baskets and other crafts. They spend
this money on food, clothes, and the maintenance of their children. Most of these
women are heads of families, such as the Kwere sisters, without whose active involve¬
ment in village affairs, according to many people in Khwai, nothing would happen.
   The interviews published here are part of ongoing research on the “River
Bushmen’ of eastern Ngamiland in Botswana, whose history and culture are poorly
understood. The interviews are remarkable for their forthright quality. The sisters
demonstrate a strong sense cjf social identity, not only asserting a positive sense of
community but also identifying their ties to other communities. They are very clear
about the process that has robbed them of their way of life: They recognize the

484    ♦   1990s and 2000s
components of enforced alienation and identify them specifically as part of a pat¬
tern of displacement and oppression. For additional information, see A. Barnard’s
Hunters and Herders of Southern Africa: A Comparative Ethnography of the Khoisan
People (1992).
                                                                  Maitseo Bolaane


                                        ♦


Keamogetswe Kwere, Interviewed 4 July 1997
We are called River Bushmen because the river is important to us. We
drink water from the river; we catch fish from the river, and we get various
vegetables such as tswii. There are also reeds which we get from the river
to make mats. Even shoes we had. They were made from buffalo hide. We
are all Basarwa, but we differ in our languages [dialects]. We understand
the others when they speak, just as they do when we speak. But their lan¬
guage is theirs, and ours is ours. Even today it is clear that we share com¬
mon cultures. They depend on hunting as we do.
   The first time my uncle Kwere was moved, there were two camps, the
Fauna and Game Camps. Fauna Camp was the first area to be conserved
by the Batawana. But the Batawana, due to lack of resources and sound
management, sought help from the Department of Wildlife to assist them
in running the area. That is how Wildlife took over. My uncle Kwere
agreed to leave his first area [Xhuko] without conflict with Wildlife
because they told him that they would like to have the park without peo¬
ple in it. That is how he came to stay at Segagama. We ploughed at
Segagama in the second year, and the following—third—year, Wildlife
came to us again and told us that they had expanded the conservation area
from Xhuko to Segagama, so they were going to move us again. Since we
were used to being moved, we did not argue with them, but we did not
want to be moved. We were afraid of the law. We did not think that we
could argue with them, because we thought the law had decided. We did¬
n’t know that we had the right to refuse, as we know now.
   Wildlife cheated my uncle Kwere Seriri because at that time he had no
one who could write or read. What I mean by cheating is that when the
Wildlife people came, they advised him to have a permanent home, but
what transpired later was that where they told him would be his land is the
same land which now the government has given to the white people, and
so they want to evacuate us again.
   They say this land belongs to the whites, whereas these lodges came after
we moved here. When the lodges were built, we as owners of the land were not
consulted. However, during the official opening of the Khwai Lodge by the
late Sir Seretse Khama [Botswana’s first president], he refused to conduct the
opening until we were called to be part of the ceremony. When Tsaro Lodge
was opened we were reluctant to participate in the official opening; however,
because they sent us a Botswana Defense Force truck, we went because we



                                We Will Be Leasing for Ourselves           ♦   485
were afraid of the soldiers. I think the fake good relationship which is posed
by the lodges is due to the fact that they heard that the Basarwa of Khwai are
petitioning to be given their land. So they are trying to be nice to us because
they are afraid that once we are in control, we will oppress them.


Lesie Kwere, Interviewed 3 July 1997
The places we used to know have been changed. Our parents cultivated
crops there. They also hunted and collected honey. The Bayei people were
always with us. They were after the meat which we hunted. We used ropes
to trap birds such as francolins and guineafowls and small animals such as
duiker, antelopes, kudu, and bushbucks. We had no dogs at that time, so we
used traps. Animals such as giraffe our grandfathers chased until it was tired,
and then they killed it with a spear. After the kill, the Bayei would come and
eat with us. They also would bring sorghum and give it to friends. This is
how we became friends. There was no superiority or inferiority involved.
  Those who passed by our areas were Bakgalagadi. They would come
along with their Basarwa servants carrying loads of items. They sold things
such as ochre at Sankuyo. During their traveling they had nothing to carry
except a rifle and fly-whisk. All the items were carried by their Basarwa
servants. The Bakgalagadi behaved as if we were their donkeys, but the
Bayei saw us as fully human beings.
  I think our great grandfathers were once servants to the Bakgalagadi,
but our fathers could not tolerate this because they challenged anybody
who had that attitude. So we also grew up rejecting any kind of oppressive
attitude. We came to know and see this attitude from one Mokgalagadi
man who came with his Basarwa servants and spent a couple of nights at
my uncle Kwere’s home. This man told my uncle that he would like to have
fresh Basarwa children from my uncle’s family to carry his goods because
the ones he came with were tired and could not reach Sankuyo. My uncle
asked him to repeat what he said, and then told him to leave his home
immediately. My uncle housed this man thinking that he was also a human
being, but if he had these attitudes, then he should leave.
  At that time, the Batawana chieftainship was doiuinant. The Batawana
people were responsible for making other people their slaves. The Bakgala¬
gadi picked up this attitude from the Batawana. The Batawana even took our
relatives away on the pretext that they were in love with them. Some of our
relatives still live there in Maun. They have their own homes and children;
they are no longer owned as slaves. Their children still call themselves
Babugakhwe because their parents were Babugakhwe. When we have social
crises such as death, they come here for funerals and to console the bereaved.
  We farmed for two years in Xhuko. During the second year, Wildlife
found us living there. In the third year they came again and told us that
they would like to establish a conservation area because they were afraid
that if they did not, they* would lose all the animals to the white people
who were hunting them.


486   ♦   1990s and 2000s
  When the park was established, there was no consultation because in a
consultation process, we expect things to be done patiently and slowly.
When Wildlife came to us the second time, they told us that they were
going to move us. They said we should pack because they had a safari vehi¬
cle. They burnt our houses as well as things that we forgot to take. We did
not like to see our houses burnt because what they were doing showed that
we meant nothing to them. They took us to a place called Segagama. We
spent a year there. In the second year they told us again to move out
because they expanded the park. We told them that we had property which
needed to be transported. They told us that they did not have a vehicle. So
we took our belongings and went to the other side of the river.
  What is most painful is that presently the [Wildlife] people again claim
that we are in the wildlife area. They want us to move to Mababe or
Sankuyo.
  These people, the present government, the councillors, are the people
who came and told us that we are disturbing the animals in their area and
we should move. Then we asked them, “Between you Batswana and us, the
despised Basarwa group, who has the knowledge of conservation?” They
said it was us Basarwa. Then we said, “Since we have lived with these ani¬
mals for a long time, while you finish yours, is it then your desire that we
should move out of here so that you can come and finish what we have
conserved?” We then told them that we would not move to Mababe nor to
Sankuyo. In our final words, we told them that if it was their wish to kill
us, they could do so, but we are not going to move out because we are not
used to life far away from the river.
  At the moment, we are in our original area. We told the government
that we would like to have a school. Their response was that if it was our
wish to have a school, we should move to a different area, then we would
be given a school. Then we told them that we will send our children to the
schools in Maun.
  We were here four years before the arrival of the first lodge. In the fifth
year, Safari South built Khwai River Lodge. Then later came Tsaro Lodge.
They employed the Babugakhwe during the construction of Tsaro Lodge,
but not as many as at Khwai Lodge. The owners of Safari South, which
was Khwai, did not discriminate against people on the basis of their eth¬
nicity. However, at present our children are not working there, because the
lodge now is no longer Safari South but Game Trackers. There is only one
Mosarwa employee there. We approached the lodge owners and told them
in a kgotla meeting that we do not like their system of discrimination
against us.


Lesie Kwere, Interviewed 1998
The government asked us about this tourism activity: What do we want to do?
Some of our local people (from Khwai) responded by saying that they want to
consume the wildlife like they used to in the past. But others responded by


                              We Will Be Leasing for Ourselves        ♦   487
saying that it is not wise to do so. Instead they wanted to conduct a tourism
activity like the government is doing so that we can benefit from the wildlife
through the profits we will be making. Then our children will find this process
going on and take over from us. And so we agreed upon this proposition.
      Then the government stated that after it gives us this land, we will have
to invite a white businessman who will conduct the tourism activity. We
the people of Khwai disagreed because if we invite a white man, he is going
to control everything. By this I mean that if there is a photographic area
and hunting area with a quota [regulating the number of animals that may
be killed per year in any area], he is only going to pay us for the quota, but
the money from photography is his. That is why we stated that we want to
conduct our own business, so that tourists can come and buy wild animals
from us, and then we can see whether we won’t progress.
      For the people in Sankuyo, I do not see any benefits except for the quota.
The white man controls the people. If he says no hunting is to be carried out,
the people of Sankuyo will not hunt. He closes their dirt roads. He even
made an empty promise that he would employ all the people of Sankuyo;
right now some are suffering because they cannot find jobs. We see that
Sankuyo does not benefit. The procedure of inviting a white man is useless.
   Those in Chobe work by choosing a white man. When he does not treat
them well, in the coming year they choose a different one. I have realized
that changing people every year is caused by the discomfort brought by
these white men. If a white man stays in the joint venture with the com¬
munity for three or four years, then that means he is working well with the
community, and the community will renew his contract. But if you see a
white man working with the community for one year and then he is
removed and a new one chosen, that means he is cheating the community.
In Chobe I heard that one white man disappeared with the community’s
money. Then they chose another white man. Through the years, they have
been changing white businessmen. I have realized that there is something
that causes these frequent changes.
  We will be leasing for ourselves, the people of Khwai.


                        Transcribed and translated by Tselanngwefela Komerese,
                                         Beauty Malope, and Enamile Tlhobolo




            Yvonne Vera, WRITING NEAR THE BONE
                              Zimbabwe 1997    English


Born in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe, in 1964, Yvonne Vera was reared by her mother and
grandmother. Her mother^ a schoolteacher, encouraged Vera’s early fascination
with the written word, while her storytelling grandmother imbued in her a deep



488     ♦   1990s and 2000s
appreciation for the oral tradition that continues to inform her writing. After com¬
pleting her initial schooling in Zimbabwe, Vera went on to study film and litera¬
ture at York University, Canada. She earned a doctorate in 1995 and returned to
Zimbabwe, where she was appointed director of the National Art Gallery in
Bulawayo, a post she continues to hold.
   Vera has consistently won awards for her fiction. Her collection of short stories,
Why Don’t You Carve Other Animals (1992), explores the contradictions of the
Zimbabwe War of Liberation and asks probing questions about the possibilities of
art in such a world. Nehanda (1993), her first novel, re-creates the life of the spirit
medium who led the First Chimurenga, or anticolonial resistance, of 1896-1897.
(For a poetic representation of Nehanda, see Elizabeth Ncube’s text in this volume.)
Without a Name (1994) is set in 1977, at the height of the War of Liberation, or
Second Chimurenga, while her third novel, Under the Tongue (1996), which won the
Commonwealth Writer’s Prize for the Africa Region, ends with the cease-fire of
1980. Butterfly Burning (1998), her most recent novel, is set in 1950s Bulawayo. In
1999 she edited a collection entitled Opening Spaces: An Anthology of African
Women’s Writing.
   The essay below seeks to bring the body and the earth into the act of writing,
thereby remembering the physicality of the oral word and rooting the written word
in the African soil. The emphasis, though, is on the importance of writing. As Vera
states in her preface to Opening Spaces, “If speaking is still difficult to negotiate,
then writing has created a free space for most women—much freer than speech.
There is less interruption, less immediate and shocked reaction. . . . The book is
bound, circulated, read. It retains its autonomy much more than a woman is
allowed in the oral situation. Writing offers a moment of intervention.”
                                                                       Meg Samuelson


                                           ♦

There is no essential truth about being a female writer. The best writing
comes from the boundaries, the ungendered spaces between male and
female. I am talking of writing itself, not the story or theme. Knowing a
story is one thing, writing it quite another.
   I like to think of writing in limitless terms, with no particular contract
with the reader, especially that of gender. When I have discovered that
unmarked and fearless territory then I am free to write, even more free to
be a woman writing. Sometimes the light coming through my window has
been much more important than the fact that I am a woman writing.
   There must be a serious purpose to my work, that is all. I must be in
touch with the earth. I can never mistake that source of inspiration and
energy to be gender, it is something we all share. It is true, however, that
one writes best on themes, feelings, actions and sentiments one is more
closely connected with. In this regard I like to think that I am writing. I
am a woman. I am writing.
  The woman I am is inside the writing, embraced and freed by it. For me
writing is light, a radiance that captures everything in a fine profile. This
light searches and illuminates, it is a safe place from which to uncover the


                                                Writing near the Bone          ♦   489
emotional havoc of our experience. Light is a bright warmth which heals.
Writing can be this kind of light. Within it I do not hide. I travel bravely
beyond that light, into the shadows that this light creates, and in that dark¬
ness it is also possible to be free, to write, to be a woman.
   I like the peasant shoes which van Gogh painted for example, their lack
of light. They are a lot darker than the reprints suggest, no light at all
except an almost clear patch of ground behind them and that is hardly
light, really. You feel the absence of light in these pictures and that really
draws your head closer and your emotion and you really want to look and
you feel heavy with a new delight. You look at these shoes and wonder
where they have been and who has been and what has been and did these
shoes ever grow anything that held some life in it, that breathed perhaps,
that threw some kind of light into the world. When I went to the gallery
shop in Amsterdam I looked for a postcard with the shoes: the reproduc¬
tion was so bright, I said this is terrible I will not buy this card even though
I want so much to do so. I went back into the gallery and looked at the
shoes again and found a large evocative canvas, thrilling in its sadness. I
knew this had been written not without light but beyond light.
      I found the same immaculate transcription of image and emotion with
“The Potato Eaters.” It was a lot darker than the “Peasant Shoes.” There
were four or five little cups and something properly muddy was being
poured into them. The cups were white but free of light. And figures in the
foreground, possibly a child, had her back to the viewer. It was difficult
standing and watching the back of this child who somehow was a potato
eater and was about to drink something so muddy from a cup that was
nearly white. There was a lantern of some kind hanging above the group
but its presence created shadows, not warmth or recognition. The picture
was very imposing in its emotion, but beautiful, harmful.
   I learnt to write when I was almost six and at the same time also discovered
the magic of my own body as a writing surface, I lived with my grandmother
for some years while my mother was pursuing her studies. Many other chil¬
dren lived with my grandmother. The house was very small and most after¬
noons we were kept outside where we woke with some fcousins and sat on large
metal garbage cans, our legs hardly long enough to touch the ground.
  The skin over my legs would be dry, taut, even heavy. It carried the cold
of our winter. Using the edges of my fingernails or pieces of dry grass bro¬
ken from my grandmother’s broom I would start to write on my legs. I
would write on my small thighs but this surface was soft and the words
would vanish and not stay for long, but it felt different to write there, a
sharp and ticklish sensation which made us laugh and feel as though we
had placed the words in a hidden place.
  Our hope increased we travelled downward to the legs where the skin
broke like black clay, and we wrote our names to all eternity. Here we wrote
near the bone and spread' the words all the way to the ankles. We wrote
deep into the skin and under skin where the words could not escape. Here,


490    ♦   1990s and 2000s
the skin was thirsty, it seemed, and we liked it. The words formed light
grey intermingling paths that meant something to our imagination and
freed us and made us forget the missing laughters of our mothers. We felt
the words in gradual bursts of pain, the first words we had written would
become less felt, the pain of that scratching now faded, and the last words
where we had dug too deep would be pulsating still, unable to be quiet.
  We looked up and laughed and drew figures of our bodies there, and the
bodies of our grandmothers which we squeezed among the letters. It was
possible, when you had used a small piece of dry bark for your pen, to be
bleeding in small dots. Such words could never depart or be forgotten.
This was bleeding, not writing. It was important to write. Then, before
running indoors to my grandmother who would have been distressed at the
changed shades of our bodies, we would use handfuls of saliva to wipe our
bodies clean. This saliva spread a warm and calming feeling over us.
   I learnt to write if not on the body then on the ground. We would spread
the loamy soil into a smooth surface with the palm of our hands using lov¬
ing and careful motions, then we would write with the tips of our fingers.
Bending over that earth, touching it with our noses, we would learn to write
large words which led us into another realm of feeling and of understanding
our place in the world. Proud of our accomplishment we would then stand
back to see what we had written. We had burrowed the earth like certain
kinds of beetles and we were immensely satisfied. We left these letters there,
on the ground, and ran off to do our chores. I always liked writing after the
rains when the soil held to our naked feet and claimed us entirely. Then we
drew shapes on the ground which could be seen for distances. Our bodies
and our earth, the smell of rain, beetles and our noses, this was writing.




          Ellen K. Kuzwayo, AFRICAN WISDOM
                             South Africa 1998        English


Ellen Kate Kuzwayo was born in Thaba Patchoa, in the Thaba ’Nchu district of
the Orange Free State. Her parents divorced when she was two years old and she
spent her childhood on her maternal grandfather’s farm, Tshiamelo (Place of
Goodness). On the farm she was also called Motlalepola, a name suggesting she
was born on a rainy day. Her family lost the farm in 1974 when it was declared a
white area under the Group Areas Act.
  After attending St. Francis College and Adams College in Natal, and Lovedale in
the Eastern Cape, she had a short career as a teacher. In 1941 she married and had two
sons, but in 1947 left her family after refusing to submit any longer to her husband’s
abuse. Seeking refuge with her father in Johannesburg, Kuzwayo had a new lease on life.
She married Godfrey Kuzwayo in 1950, thereafter living with him and their child in
Kliptown, Johannesburg. Later, her two sons joined her. In 1955 she qualified as a social
worker and in her new career achieved recognition as a relentless fighter for human
rights, women’s rights, and a better life for the young, earning a people’s title as “Mother


                                                           African Wisdom          ♦   491
of Soweto.” In 1976 she was also appointed a member of the Committee of Ten, an
activist committee based in Soweto. She left the Christian youth organizations with
which she had been largely involved and took up a post in the School of Social Work
at the University of the Witwatersrand. She was detained without trial for five months
in 1977 under the Terrorism Act; in 1979, she was named Woman of the Year by the
Johannesburg Star, and in 1987 was awarded an honorary doctorate of law by the
University of the Witwatersrand. She was, until recently, a member of Parliament.
      Besides the book from which this excerpt is taken, Kuzwayo has published an
autobiography, Call Me Woman (1985), and a collection of short stories and fables,
Sit Down and Listen (1990). Her first book made her, in 1985, the first black South
African to win the prestigious CNA (Central News Agency) Prize.
      Kuzwayo’s Setswana proverbs function as a window on African life, providing
cultural values in a condensed form. Noting that violence and abuse continue to
increase daily, including senseless rapes and killings of young and old women, she
suggests that proverbs may serve to reconnect Africans with ubuntu (respect for
human dignity). In this spirit, she offers proverbs she learned in childhood as one
possible instrument of change.
                                                                    Abner Nyamende

                                         ♦


Looking back on my life, it suddenly dawned on me that, possibly from my
birth, and certainly from the age of five years, I was exposed to two distinct
systems of education. While I consciously embraced one of these systems, I
was hardly aware of the other.
   From the age of six or seven, I attended school at Thabapatchoa Primary
in the district ofThaba-Nchu in the Free State. This school was on the farm
of my maternal grandfather, Jeremiah Gopolang Makgothi. At the turn of
the century, he himself had built the school with the assistance of his imme¬
diate family and the community of other families living on the farm.
  This was the only farm in the area which provided a school for Africans.
The few coloured children living on his farm and on the surrounding
white-owned farms also attended Thabapatchoa Primary. [. . .]
  The school was run and administered by one teacher. In those years,
beginners attending school were provided with small reading books known
as Sepelete sa Setswana, which meant Setswana spelling books for Setswana-
speaking pupils. Indeed, inside of a year those young pupils became profi¬
cient in reading, writing and spelling. [. . .]
  In addition to formal learning, our schooling also provided us with the
opportunity to make friends, to play, to socialise and to develop in all
directions. The long hours at school compelled us to bring something to
eat at break. Pupils from the village of farm workers generally brought
lovely sour porridge, known as “motogo-wa-seqhaqhabola,” in silvery con¬
tainers with handles. These containers were clean and shining. We, on the
other hand, brought butter-and-jam sandwiches to school. Soon, we were
exchanging our lunch of Sandwiches for motogo-wa-seqhaqhabola, which
we greatly enjoyed, whilst our friends loved the sandwiches. [. . .]


492     ♦   1990s and 2000s
  These memories of my formal schooling still give me great joy. To this
day, I value and treasure it as part of the foundation of who I am today.
  It was thus with great sadness that I watched as “Bantu Education” was
introduced. The legacy of Bantu Education saw many students leaving school
and drifting into the streets or becoming unemployable. In the seventies, as
most people know, Bantu Education led to an eruption of violence as school
children rebelled against an inferior and oppressive education system.
  As a consequence, violence and lawlessness increased dramatically in
the past two decades. Although I am fully convinced that the blame for
today’s violence and crime should rest squarely on the shoulders of the old
Nationalist government, the violence in my community has given me
many sleepless nights. As I turned these problems over and over in my
mind, my thoughts suddenly drifted back to the time when I was young.
And this was when a second, less formalised system of education came
back to me.




I recall my mother’s voice which called me to order, and often ended with
some strong proverb to express the gravity of the wrong done. In those
years, parents’ reprimands were taken seriously and with respect. It was
common practice for my mother to send me off soul-searching with a
proverb. That proverb said it all.
   As I write this now, I can hear her voice: “Tsholofelo”—her favourite
name for me, meaning “hope”—“ngwana yo o sa reetseng molao wa bagolo,
o tla thanya lomapo lo le tsebeng.”
   This is one of the commonest proverbs used by adults when they repri¬
mand youth. The literal meaning is that a child who does not heed the eld¬
ers’ warning and advice will suffer the rupture of his or her eardrum:
Children who are disobedient will meet tragedy.
   Of the many interactions I had with my mother, those many years ago,
one stands out with clarity. I remember the occasion when Mother sent me
to the main road, about twenty yards away from the homestead, to invite a
passing group of seasonal work-seekers home for a meal. She instructed me
to take a container along and collect dry cow-dung for making a fire. I was
then to prepare the meal for the group of work-seekers.
   The thought of making an open fire outside at midday, cooking in a
large three-legged pot in that intense heat, was sufficient to upset even an
angel. I did not manage to conceal my feelings from my mother, and after
serving the group, she called me to the veranda, where she usually sat to
attend to her sewing and knitting.
   Looking straight into my eyes, she said, “Tsholofelo, why did you sulk
when I requested you to prepare a meal for those poor destitute people?”
   Despite my attempt to deny her allegation, and using the heat of the fire
and the sun as an excuse for my alleged behaviour, Mother, giving me a


                                                  African Wisdom         ♦   493
firm look, said, “Lonao ga lo na nko”—“A foot has no nose.” It means: You
cannot detect what trouble may lie ahead for you. Had I denied this group
of people a meal, it may have happened that in my travels some time in the
future, I found myself at the mercy of some of those very individuals.
      As if that was not enough to shame me, Mother continued, “Motho ke
motho ka motho yo mongwe.” The literal meaning: A person is a person
because of another person. Its closest English equivalent is probably: “No
man is an island.”
      This particular proverb is found among all ethnic groups in South Africa.
I believe it is similar to the concept of “Ubuntu” in the Nguni languages,
isiZulu and isiXhosa, and “Botho” in the              Sotho languages, Setswana,
Sesotho and Sepedi.
      This one proverb lays down the principles and values of “human” inter¬
action for all African inhabitants of southern Africa. I would not be sur¬
prised if it is also found in the rest of the continent.
      In African culture, “Botho” expresses the interdependence of all people
regardless of age, sex or social standing. When we in South Africa discuss
the violence of the present day, we often end up saying: “What has become
of Botho?”
      I am haunted by the prevailing violence; the abuse of young girls, the rape
of young and old women, the car-theft, the senseless killings of people ... I
sometimes wake up in the middle of the night and ask myself: “What has
happened to Botho? How can it be restored?”
   As I grappled with the frightening violence and racked my mind for
remedies, I had to conclude that any effective remedy would have to com¬
bine a variety of solutions. And the language of proverbs struck me as one
of the instruments, which could help.




              Marevasei Kachere, WAR MEMOIR
                           Zimbabwe 1998         chiShona
                                                            \
The Liberation War, one of the most significant events in the history of Zimbabwe,
was a civil war in which black people overthrew the minority white government
through an armed struggle. At first a trickle of black militants secretly left the coun¬
try to train as guerrillas in Zambia and later Mozambique, and to come back and
fight for national independence. The trickle turned into a flood in the 1970s as thou¬
sands of men, women, and children joined the struggle. The story told by Marevasei
Kachere in a series of interviews is one of the few accounts by women that speak of
their involvement in the heroic task of establishing an independent Zimbabwe.
   Although the desire to achieve independence was the main cause of the war,
more immediate ones provided people with reasons to join in. These included
unemployment, the violence of the Rhodesian regime, and the love of adventure
and excitement. In the military camps in exile, men and women trained together.
They were informed about the history of the grievances of the black people and


494     *   1990s AND 2000s
their leaders promised them that, in the new Zimbabwe, these grievances would be
redressed and land, jobs, and a better life would be within everyone’s reach. The
active involvement of women in the war heralded a new era in which traditional
women would be accorded equal status with men, since they had fought as men.
Women cared for the sick and wounded, but they also carried supplies to the front
lines and fought when needed with the guns they had been trained to use.
   Kachere’s story throws light on all this and on the suffering in the camps from
hunger, sickness, and enemy attacks. But it is silent on how women were still
abused and exploited by their male counterparts during the war. The film Flame,
produced in 1995, generated controversy for, among other reasons, screening a
scene that exposed a senior officer in the liberation army raping a woman fighter.
The public was not yet ready to acknowledge the additional hardships that women
suffered in the military camps. Eighteen years after independence, Kachere’s high
hopes and expectations of the 1970s remained unfulfilled. The small lump sum
paid out to each ex-combatant in 1997 and the small monthly pension fall far short
of what she and others had expected.
                                                               Chiedza Musengezi


                                        ♦

My name is Marevasei Kachere and I was born at Uzumba in Murewa
District in 1961, the last in a family of eight children. I went to school at
Chidodo when I was eight years old and stayed there up to grade seven. All
the children in our family went to school but none of us progressed beyond
grade seven, the top class of the primary school. My parents were unusual,
as, unlike most parents in our village, they chose to send their daughters to
school. This may have been due to the fact that my father had been an only
child and so had not experienced discrimination against girls in his family.
My education was brought to an end by the Liberation War. I didn’t even
see the results of my grade seven examinations since we had to leave our
home before the results were available. When I eventually came back after
the war, I was told that all the school records had been burnt.
   Each day, after school, I had to look after the cattle and work in the
fields, sometimes helping my father and one of my brothers to plough. I
would lead the plough oxen so that they kept on the right course. As with
schooling, there was no discrimination in our family between boys and
girls as far as work was concerned. Any of us could do anything that had
to be done. For instance, my brothers often used to fetch water from the
well, something that is considered to be a girl’s job. We lived very simply.
It was only on special occasions that I was able to eat the food that I loved
best—bread and eggs—and that, of course, disappeared along with our
hens when we were forced by the Rhodesian soldiers to move into the keep
or protected village.
   In the early 1970s I used to hear the old people talking about a war and
about terrorists, but at first I didn’t understand what this meant. Then,
round about 1972, when the war was getting hot in the Mount Darwin



                                                         War Memoir        *   495
area, we heard stories that told of terrorists who were invisible. If the
Rhodesian soldiers came anywhere near them, they would see only their
hats but not the actual people.
      We just heard these stories without, as I say, understanding them.
Understanding what war was came to us when the soldiers arrived in our
district. When they first came they questioned people about the presence of
terrorists, and I think that at that period only a few people had been in
contact with them, bringing them food and other necessities. But then we
were told that on such and such a date we were going to be moved into a
keep, although we had no idea what a keep was. So on the appointed day in
1975 the soldiers came and, going from house to house in our village, forced
the people at gunpoint to leave with everything they could carry. Anyone
who refused to move was shot. And then the soldiers burnt all our houses.
      There were no houses in the keep and, at first, people made simple grass
shelters to stay in—with no roofs—until they managed to build huts. A
whole family was crowded into each of these shelters, but in my case, I was
lucky since my brothers and sister had married and I was the only one stay¬
ing with my parents.
      The keep was a large area surrounded by a very high barbed-wire fence.
It was so high that one couldn’t possibly climb over it and the wires were
placed so close together that no one was able to squeeze through it. There
were no two ways about it—when the soldiers said that we had to stay
inside we had no choice. They were afraid that if we were allowed to go
freely in and out we would carry food to the “terrorists” as they called
them. Of course people had to be allowed to go out at set times to fetch
water and to tend the vegetable gardens, and on these occasions everyone
who went out was searched to see if the container he or she carried held
food. And on coming back, if you were carrying a bucket of water the
guards would stir it with a stick to see if there were any explosives in it.
You had to make quite sure that you had brought in enough food and water
for the family for if the gate was kept closed, as it sometimes was, then
there was nothing you could do but go hungry. And if you came back late,
after being outside, you would be shot.               A
   Our school was also inside the fence, and every morning we had to go
to school. The soldiers used to come to check the register to make sure that
every child was present. If anyone was absent the rest of us were beaten
with a length of hosepipe—every one of us—by the soldiers who were try¬
ing to get us to say where such and such a child had gone. We never did
say for we believed that if they found out where the child had gone that
child would be killed.
  I was not invited by anyone to join the Liberation Struggle, but I was
forced into going by the intolerable circumstances in which we lived. The
soldiers used to come and take us to a place called IVlashambanhaka where
they put us in drums full of water and beat us almost to death. This painful
routine went on for some time. Even old people suffered in the same way.


496    *   1990s and 2000s
Indeed, anybody who was suspected of having fed the guerrillas was taken
out and beaten and then locked in the keep again. I was tired of being
beaten and so I decided I would go out to join the Liberation Struggle.
Doing that, I thought, might lead to my death, but as far as that was con¬
cerned I was under a constant threat of death in the keep, so it was all one
whether I stayed or went. On balance I thought it better to go.
  While I was still in the keep some guerrillas arrived at a base called
Birimhiri and a message came that we should prepare sadza and take it to
the comrades. We cooked the sadza, and on that day we were lucky for the
soldiers had gone off to read their newspapers, and the DA’s were holed up
in a strong point fortified with sandbags which was called zvimudhuri, so
we slipped out carrying the food, and I never came back. I was with a
friend called Kiretti and we just walked saying nothing to each other for
there was nothing to say; I mean we had no idea what to expect when we
arrived at where we were going. This was all done in a moment, completely
unplanned. I had not even told my mother that I was going.
  That was my first day to meet the comrades. They were just ordinary
people, quite visible, wearing uniforms some of which were plain khaki and
some camouflage, and carrying their guns which, I noticed, they never let
go of since they might have to fight at any moment. We were a bit afraid
at first but soon got used to them. There were ten of them altogether.
When they had eaten and were about to leave we told them we were going
with them; that we wanted to go to Mozambique because we were tired of
being beaten. At first they refused to take us and said they were taking
boys only, and that though they had taken girls before, they did not
encourage those who were very young to go. But we insisted that we were
not going back to the keep to be beaten to death or to be injured, as my
hearing had been impaired through the punishment I had received. And
eventually they agreed.
  When we left there were four girls and quite a number of boys from our
keep in the group. We did not know what to expect but I did not regret
what I had done. We started our journey at night, around eight o’clock,
and travelled to Karimimbika which is still in the Uzumba District.
Another group of comrades joined us there and we went on, travelling
always by night, going via Mudzi and Area 6, and then straight to the bor¬
der between Rhodesia and Mozambique. My tennis shoes were soon worn
out, and I had to make do with the one dress I had been wearing when I
left the keep.
   After we had crossed into Mozambique we camped at a base called
Mubhanana where we stayed for some time, carrying supplies of arms for the
comrades who came from Chambere. Then we moved to Zhangara Camp
where there were about seven hundred people, including two hundred who
were my age. At one stage there were more women than men in this camp,
but in my age group there were more boys than girls, and there were no old
people. At Zhangara, as in other camps, we were taught politics. Our


                                                     War Memoir      ♦   497
instructors told us about the war and its origins and said that we should not
think of returning home since we had chosen to come and fight for our
country’s independence.
   For my part I never wanted to go back while things were as they were.
Yes, I missed my parents, but I was in a large group of young people, all of
whom were in the same boat, and that made it easier to forget about your
own problems. Most of the time I was happy because I had friends—
Ebamore, Tarisai, Mabhunu and Shingirai. We sang together in the choir;
in times of hardship we comforted each other; we plaited our hair and
mended our clothes. If we were lucky enough to have needles we made
small bags in which to keep personal things out of our old dresses.
Discipline was fairly strict in the camp. Girls were separated from boys and
we never had boyfriends. If a girl did leave camp to meet a boy and was
caught she was punished. It wasn’t easy to get out of the camp because the
exits were guarded. Pregnancies were rare, but girls fell pregnant when they
left camp to perform military duties like carrying arms and ammunition.
The most common offence for which one was beaten or made to carry
ammunition was escaping from the camp to barter clothes for food in the
surrounding villages. Beatings were not carried out in the open and we
only saw people being called to report for a beating. In all the time I stayed
at this camp I never broke the rules, except on one occasion: my friends
and I missed a meal because we had stayed too long at the river where we
were getting rid of the lice in our hair. Luckily we were not punished for
that. [. . .]
  We also did some training with “arms,” wooden guns that we ourselves
had made. Being educated was a big advantage in the camp, and it was the
educated ones who were usually the first to be selected to become trainers.
I wasn’t considered to be educated but I was good at physical activities so
I was asked to help with military training. After we had finished the ini¬
tial training we were allowed to handle real guns, and were given lessons
on the different parts of a gun and on how to dismantle and load them. All
this time boys and girls were taught together, and we had both male and
female instructors. These lessons gave us confidence and a sense of power,
so different from how we felt when we were untrained and unarmed.
  The most distressing episode in this part of my life was when Tembwe
was bombed on November 25, 1977. On that day people were carrying out
their duties as usual but another girl and I hadn’t gone to work because we
were sick. I had an extensive burn on my leg as a result of an accident in
the kitchen. Shingi and I had been to the clinic and on our way back we
spotted a plane. We were heading for the kitchen, an area of shelters and
large drums on fires in which to cook sadza, but before we got there this
plane dropped a bomb right in the middle of it. All those on duty in the
kitchen were killed—some by the explosion and others by the porridge
from the drums. We ran fo the river and hid among the reeds but then sol¬
diers appeared and began shooting towards us and I thought I was going


498   ♦   1990s AND 2000s
to die. I was hit, and the bullet wounds on my leg were deep, but I sur¬
vived, though it was three months before my injuries healed.
  I had never thought of the possibility of dying in a battle before. During
my training I had imagined an exchange of gunfire, but nothing more. I had
never seen a dead person, but now I saw so many. As we ran to the river I had
stepped on the bodies ot those who had died, and the thought of that expe¬
rience horrified me. People die in war and I knew it then all too fearfully.
  Soon after the attack on Tembwe I was sent with other survivors to
Maroro where I completed my military training. I was then chosen,
together with live girls and nine boys, to carry arms—what we called
caches—to the comrades who were in the field. These arms—grenades for
instance—were packed into sealed bags, and with these we crossed the
border into Rhodesia, protected by an armed guard who knew the way. We
entered the Mutoko area in July 1978 and went straight to the traditional
healer in that area who gave us the go-ahead to operate there. We had been
instructed not to seek confrontation with the Rhodesian security forces,
and to hide if we came across any. My one experience of action in the field
was in Area G. We were having a meal of sadza when we were attacked.
We ran away. But four of our comrades were killed by the enemy in this
engagement.
  In December 1979 a cease-fire was declared. [. . .] We celebrated
Zimbabwean Independence on April 18, 1980. We talked about the fact
that we had liberated our country and that now no one would be a beggar
in his or her own land. We believed that every person in the country would
get enough food and a place to stay, and yes, I expected to get a job that
matched my education and training. We had great expectations. At that
time our leaders told us that what we expected would come true.
  As it worked out, some of us were sent to schools, but then the schools
were closed. The leaders came and asked for those who wanted jobs, but
only the highly educated were taken and given jobs in, for instance, the
police force. I stayed behind in that camp while others went off to work,
and on top of that they said I was too short to join the police.
  Meanwhile, a cousin of mine had come looking for me, as relatives did
in those days when family members who had long been lost were return¬
ing to these assembly points. As a result I went to see my parents and we
wept on one another’s necks when we met. They were poor. They had lost
everything in the war, and they couldn’t help me, nor I them at that time.
After staying with them for a short time I went back to Manyene. My hope
lay in the promise of jobs that had been made, and I was anxious to get
back because I did not want to miss out. [. . .]
  Eighteen years after Independence most of the promises made to us
remain unfulfilled. We were all promised houses and jobs and a good life,
regardless of one’s standard of education, but this has not happened.
   The hard conditions in the camps in Mozambique have affected my
health badly. I think I picked up diseases there from which I have never


                                                      War Memoir      ♦   499
fully recovered. I would never recommend my daughter to follow my
example if such a situation arose again.
  The major change of the last couple of years has been the $50 000 pay¬
out and the $2 000 monthly pension. I managed to buy a plough, a cart and
two oxen, and I was given land to use. I don’t have to dig my field with a
hoe anymore. But I think the money is too little. I suffered for too long
and the money came too late.


                                                         Transcribed by Grace Tube
                                                 Translated by Chiedza Musengezi




                                  Antjie Krog,
  The Birth of This Country’s Language
                            South Africa 1998      English


Antjie Krog, an acclaimed Afrikaans poet, was born in Kroonstad, Orange Free
State, South Africa, in 1952. An outspoken opponent of the apartheid state, she
participated in the historic 1989 Victoria Falls meeting between Afrikaans intel¬
lectuals and writers and the then-exiled African National Congress.
   For two years, under her married name Antjie Samuel, she reported on the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) for the South African Broadcasting
Corporation and, with her team, received the prestigious local Pringle Award for
excellence in media coverage. It is out of this experience that Krog wrote Country
of My Skull, from which the following excerpts are drawn.
      Country of My Skull engages with the TRC on an intensely personal level, pro¬
viding both a record of and a response to what many see as the crucial event in the
formation of the new South Africa. Krog uses a multigeneric tapestry of styles and
voices in order to arrive at her own truth, a truth “quilted together from hundreds
of stories.” Her own testimony revolves around a search for a new way of belonging
in South Africa. Shocked by the exposure of farms as the base of hit squads and the
site of torture, she revisits the farm of her childhood, one© a source of poetic inspi¬
ration. She searches for a rebirth of language and draws attention to the TRC as a
national moment that will allow storytelling, and healing, to begin again.
   Krog has won numerous awards, local and international, for her eight volumes of
poetry, beginning with Dogter van Jaffa (Daughter of Jafta) (1970), published when
she was eighteen. More recently, she has added to her repertoire children’s poetry
and prose, two coeditions of Afrikaans verse, a prose murder narrative, and a play,
Why Is It That Those Who Toyi-Toyi in Front Are Always So Fat?, which brings black
and white women into dialogue with one another. In 2000 she published her ninth
volume of poetry in Afrikaans as well as her first English volume, Down to My Last
Skin. Country of My Skull shared first prize in the 1999 Sunday Times Alan Paton
Award for nonfiction and saw Krog awarded the prestigious Hiroshima Prize.
                              '                                        Meg Samuelson




500     ♦   1990s and 2000s
                                      ♦
Tension is plain to see in the faces and body language of all the Commis¬
sioners. Archbishop Tutu is continually rubbing his right hand, several pairs
ol shoulders are tensely set, their faces look tired and drawn beneath two
big South African flags and Truth Commission banners. The city hall of
East London is packed from wall to wall. Even in the galleries people are
sitting on the steps.
  Last night, the Archbishop says, he had butterflies in his stomach: “We
were aware from the beginning that the Commission could go terribly and
horribly wrong. But this first victims’ hearing is the making or breaking of
the Commission.”
  “So what are your worst fears?”
   He laughs nervously. “Silly things, like the microphones not working,
security problems ... or terrible things like victims not showing up or vio¬
lence breaking out.”
   Commissioner Bongani Finca starts with the well-known Xhosa hymn:
Lizalise idinga lakho. “The forgiveness of sins makes a person whole.” As the
song carries, the victims file into the hall and take their seats at the front.
Through ritual they are physically separated from the rest of the audience.
   Archbishop Tutu prays. But untypically he sounds as if he is praying
from a piece of paper: “We long to put behind us the pain and division of
Apartheid, together with all the violence which ravaged our communities
in its name. And so we ask you to bless this Truth and Reconciliation
Commission with your wisdom and guidance as a body which seeks to
redress the wounds in the minds and the bodies of those who suffered.”
   Everyone stands with their heads bowed while the names of the
deceased and disappeared who will come under the spotlight today are read
out. A big white candle emblazoned with a red cross is lit. Then all the
Commissioners go over to the row of victims to greet and welcome them,
while the audience stays standing.
  But the journalists in the media room are hardly aware of this consecra¬
tion of space. Frantic shouting accompanies the attempts to tune in TV
monitors, establish clear sound reception and set up laptop computers.
Radio has its own small room. We have a whole newly appointed team,
which has to cover the event in all eleven official languages. Today’s hear¬
ings will be broadcast live, after an hour-long programme on the meaning
of the legislation, the origin of amnesty, the workings of the Commission
and an interview with the Minister of Justice, who sanctioned the legisla¬
tion. Somewhere in a corner, foreign journalists are being briefed on the
history of the Eastern Cape, how to pronounce “Qaqawuli” and “Mxenge,”
who the Cradock Four and the Pebco Three were. Like people possessed
they take down notes. The locals watch them from a distance.




                          The Birth of This Country’s Language          ♦   501
To seize the surge of language by its soft, bare skull

Beloved, do not die. Do not dare die! I, the survivor, I wrap you in words
so that the future inherits you. I snatch you from the death of forgetful¬
ness. I tell your story, complete your ending—you who once whispered
beside me in the dark.


“When I opened the door . . . there was my closest friend and comrade . . .
She was standing on the doorstep and she screamed: ‘My child, my little
Nomzamo is still in the house!’... I stared at her . .. my most beautiful friend
. . . her hair flaming and her chest like a furnace . . . she died a day later. I
pulled out her baby from the burning house ... I put her on the grass .. . only
to find that her skin stayed behind on my hands. She is with me here today.”
“I was trying to see my child. Just when he was about to open the police
van at the back, I heard a voice shouting, saying: ‘No, don’t show her any¬
thing—hou die meid daar wegl’ [‘Keep the kaffir girl away from there!’] But
I managed. I pulled a green curtain ... I saw . . . my . . . child . . . sleeping
among tyres . . . and he was foaming in the mouth and he was . . . already
dead . . . Then they pulled him out and threw him on the ground . . . And
I looked at him . . . And he was dying . . . and they won’t allow me to hold
him . . . and my key fell on the ground .. . And they asked, quickly: ‘What’s
that? What was that?’ . . . And I said: . . . ‘It’s the key of my house.’”


“This inside me . . . fights my tongue. It is . . . unshareable. It destroys . . .
words. Before he was blown up, they cut off his hands so he could not be fin¬
gerprinted ... So how do I say this?—this terrible ... I want his hands back.”


“It was Sunday. And cold. He came into the kitchen. ‘Make me some bean
soup.’
  “‘It’s Sunday, jong, I want to cook special food.’
  “But he wanted bean soup.
  “While dressing for church we heard the noise. The youths were coming
down the road. We were standing in our bedroom. We were not talking. We
were not moving. They surrounded the house and they shouted: ‘Let the spy
die, let the spy diei’They threw stones through the window. When they left,
he said to me: ‘Don’t cry Nontuthuzelo. A person dies only once, not many
times. I know now where these things are leading to. Come, let’s make
soup.’ We went to the kitchen and put the beans in a pot.
   “Then someone we knew knocked at the door. ‘The comrades are burn¬
ing your shop, Uncle Mick!’
  “‘I’ll be back for lunch,’ he said to me.
   “They told me afterwards. He walked up to the door of his shop, he didn’t
look back . . . someone in the crowd shot him in the back . . . They told me
afterwards Craig Kotze had said my husband was the one who betrayed
Steve Biko.”


502   ♦   1990s AND 2000s
Two policemen got on either chair and they dragged me to the window,
and then they said I can now jump ... I refused . . . they grabbed me by my
shoulders and lifted me physically up and pushed me out of the window . .
. and they were holding me by my ankles . . . each policeman holding one
ankle. All I could see was the concrete floor at the bottom—we were three
floors up, and all of a sudden one would let go of one foot—as he’s about to
catch my foot, the one he had released, the other chap lets go—and they
played like that . . . and you know you thought: God, this is the end.”


 They held me . . . they said, ‘Please don’t go in there . . . ’ I just skipped
through their legs and went in ... I found Bheki ... he was in pieces . . .
he was hanging on pieces . . . He was all over . . . pieces of him and brain
was scattered all around . . . that was the end of Bheki.”


“At Caledon Square I heard a loud sound. Policemen were celebrating.
They said: ‘We’ve got Looksmartf I was in my cell when I saw Looksmart
being dragged up a flight of stairs by two policemen. They were beating
him as he went up the stairs. I noticed that his beard had been pulled out
. . . one by one ... on one side of his face. He was bleeding heavily from
the mouth. Two days later they took him again—his hands handcuffed
behind his back. That was the last time I saw Looksmart Ngudle.”


“And the man there sitting next to the ambulance driver—he stood there
with my son’s intestines in his hands and he was actually holding it and
carried it into the ambulance.”


“In the mortuary—after the Queenstown massacre, I had to identify my
son. We waited in front of the mortuary ... a thick black stream of blood
was running from under the door . . . blocking the outside drain . . . inside,
the stench was unbearable . . . bodies were stacked upon each other . . . the
blood from my child’s body was already green.”


“This white man with the red scarf, he shot into the outside bathroom
where Sonnyboy was hiding ... I was standing in the kitchen ... I saw him
dragging my child. Sonnyboy was already dead. He was holding him by his
legs like a dog. I saw him digging a hole, scraping Sonnyboy’s brains into
that hole and closing it with his boot. The sun was bright . . . but it went
dark when I saw him lying there. It’s an everlasting pain. It will stop never
in my heart. It always comes back. It eats me apart. Sonnyboy, rest well, my
child. I’ve translated you from the dead.”

“I asked them, ‘Show me the mark on his chin, then I will know it’s my
son.’ They showed me the mark on his chin, and I said: ‘It’s not my son.’”



                         The Birth of This Country’s Language           ♦   503
“When Fuzile didn’t come home that night I went to look for him. Now
this makes me mad really. My son was shot and nobody told me. I looked
everywhere and nobody told me my son was in the mortuary . . . they later
gave me his clothes. His T-shirt looked as if it had been eaten by rats.”


“As she had a baby, the police said that the corpse could breastfeed the baby.”


“Barnard was a frightful man—the cop we couldn’t kill. He always drove
this red Valiant and wore this red doek. Rambo of the Western Cape, he
called himself. Whenever his car appeared on the shimmering horizon
leading the yellow Casspirs, we knew: someone dies today. We will remem¬
ber the man with the red scarf who shot dead our sons.”
“This was the last thing I saw: Barnard standing next to his car. He spoke
Xhosa like a Xhosa. He pointed his firearm at me. I felt something hitting
my cheek. I felt my eyes itching. I was scratching my eyes and yelling for
help. Since then I’ve been blind . . . and unemployed . . . and alone and
homeless. But today . . . today it feels as if I can nearly see ...”


“I heard shots ... I ran . . . slipped and fell... I crawled out at the front door
. . . On the steps my son sat. . . with his father’s face in his hands . . . He was
covered in blood . . . He cried over and over: ‘Daddy, talk to me . . . ’ Today he
is 21 years old. I am still woken at night by his cries: ‘Wipe the blood .. . wipe
the blood from my father’s face.’”


“That morning I did something I had never done before. My husband was
still at his desk busy with the accounts of our business. I went up to him
and stood behind his chair. I put my hands under his arms and tickled him
... he looked surprised and unexpectedly happy.
   “‘And now?’ he asked.
  “‘I am going to make tea,”’ I said.
  “While I poured water on the tea bags, I heard this devastating noise. Six
men stormed into our study and blew his head off. My five-year-old daugh¬
ter was present.. . That Christmas I found a letter on his desk: ‘Dear Father
Christmas, please bring me a soft teddy bear with friendly eyes . . . My
daddy is dead. If he was here I would not have bothered you.’ I put her in a
boarding school. The morning we drove there we had a flat tyre. ‘You see,’
she said, ‘Daddy does not want me to go there . . . He wants me to stay with
you ... I have watched him die, I must be there when you die ... ’ She is
now a teenager and has tried twice to commit suicide.”




In the beginning it was seeing. Seeing for ages, filling the head with ash.
No air. No tendril. Now i:o seeing, speaking is added and the eye plunges
into the mouth. Present at the birth of this country’s language itself. [. . .]


504   ♦   1990s and 2000s
In a wild arch of air I rock with the Commissioners in the boat back to the
mainland. I am tilled with an indescribable tenderness towards this
Commission. With all its mistakes, its arrogance, its racism, its sanctimony,
its incompetence, the lying, the failure to get an interim reparation policy off
the ground after two years, the showing off—with all of this—it has been so
brave, so naively brave in the winds of deceit, rancour and hate. Against a
flood crashing with the weight of a brutalizing past on to new usurping pol¬
itics, the Commission has kept alive the idea of a common humanity.
Painstakingly it has chiselled a way beyond racism and made space for all of
our voices. For all its failures, it carries a flame of hope that makes me proud
to be from here, of here.
  But I want to put it more simply. I want this hand of mine to write it.
For us all; all voices, all victims:

  because of you
   this country no longer lies
  between us but within


   it breathes becalmed
   after being wounded
   in its wondrous throat


  in the cradle of my skull
  it sings, it ignites
  my tongue, my inner ear, the cavity of heart
  shudders towards the outline
          new in soft intimate clicks and gutturals


  of my soul the retina learns to expand
  daily because by a thousand stories
  I was scorched


  a new skin.

  I am changed for ever. I want to say:
          forgive me
          forgive me
          forgive me


You whom I have wronged, please
take me


with you.


                          The Birth of This Country’s Language          ♦   505
                                 Communal,
      Bojale— Setswana Initiation Songs
                           Botswana 1998       Setswana


Initiation songs are normally sung by the initiates at either Bojale or Bogwera (ini¬
tiation schools for girls and boys, respectively). Before the advent of Christianity
many ethnic groups in Botswana regarded these schools highly. But soon after
most Batswana embraced the Christian religion, these customs were abandoned as
unchristian. In fact Chief Khama III of the Bangwato abolished these initiation
practices while the Batawana, Bangwaketse, Bakwena, and Barolong abandoned
them, and the Bakgatla simply suspended them. At present, those who have con¬
tinued the practices include the Bakgatla, Balete, and Batlokwa, who occasionally
serve some willing initiates from other ethnic groups.
   Bojale, designed to usher girls or young women into womanhood and adulthood,
are run privately and exclusively for young initiates, who are subjected to a complex
web of rules and taboos including a dress code: “bare breasts, bare head, bare feet
[or cheap tackies], and ordinary wrapper around the waist.” The greatest taboo is
sharing Bojale experiences with those who have never undergone the initiation rites.
   The main objective is to educate the young women on their rights and respon¬
sibilities as full citizens of their communities. This, for example, is done by teach¬
ing the girls the value of avoiding premarital sex, the benefits of airing grievances
in a nonconfrontational manner, the importance of treating older people with rev¬
erence, the virtues of being productive and dependable members of the society, and
the merits of endurance and perseverance during hardships.
   The teachers’ lessons and the initiates’ responses to the instructions are sung
conversationally so as to create a sense of dialogue. Taken together, the songs offer
a commentary on the harsh realities of womanhood and life in general. The songs
are short, often five to six lines, yet they convey complete and meaningful ideas.
The singing itself is long because lines or even whole stanzas are repeated.
Metaphor, mockery, parallelism, and rhetorical questions are also characteristic.
   These songs were collected and published by Ntikwe Motlotle in 1998. Some,
which she had sung at her own initiation in Mochudi, she first recorded in 1984
for a radio program at the National Museum, Gaborone. Some were recorded and
transcribed by Elizabeth Nelbach Wood in 1975.
                                                                  Nobantu Rasebotsa

                                         ♦

   Complaints by the Initiates
   Song One
   I dig hard clay
   Womanhood is a hardship
   Yes, yes, womanhood & a hardship
   Yes, yes, womanhood is a hardship


506   ♦   1990s and 2000s
   Please help me dig this clay
   Womanhood is a hardship.

   Song Two
   Escaping, I try to hide outside the wall
   Trying to hide outside the wall
   The ears heard of it, the ears heard of it
   As I try to hide outside the wall
   The ears heard it
   It got back to the ears.


   Song Three
   I am not going anywhere
   I am not going anywhere
   My mother chases guests away
   It’s a month since I visited
   My mother chases guests away.


   Complaints by the Instructors
   Song Four
   Let that young girl go
   Let her go, I have given up on her
   I try to speak to her
   It’s like speaking to a stone
   A small stone like steel iron
   The whiteman’s steel iron.

   Song Five
   Are you the troublemaker, are you the cause of the storm?
   Are you the stirrer of that dust-storm?
   Are you the cause of the storm?
   Let it build. Build up as me.
   Are you the cause of the storm?


                          Translated by Leloba Molema and Nobantu Rasebotsa




                                   Communal,
      Intonjane—Xhosa Initiation Songs
                          South Africa 1999       isiXhosa


In Xhosa society intonjane was and still is regarded as a sacred ritual performed to
mark the development of a girl into womanhood when she first menstruates.
During this time, the girl is secluded for about eight days in a hut prepared for the


                                Intonjane—Xhosa Initiation Songs             ♦   507
occasion, and tended by selected younger girls. Women and girls perform songs to
celebrate the event. The observance of this ritual is so important that if a married
woman experiences problems like those of infertility, she might have to return to
her parents’ home to have the ritual performed if it was not done before. During
the time of seclusion, the girl is instructed in sexual matters by an experienced
older woman, and especially on how to behave as a young woman. Although inton-
jane is no longer universally practiced, many rural communities still observe it.
   In Xhosa culture the performance of song marks almost every social or ceremo¬
nial occasion that brings people together. Singing is accompanied by ululation and
rhythmic movements such as the clapping of hands, stamping of feet on the
ground, and shaking of the upper part of the body. Even the attire is specific to the
occasion, and the words of the song also articulate the uniqueness of the event.
   Some of the songs at intonjane are performed when the girl goes into seclusion;
others when she comes out. Since both times are occasions of great joy and grati¬
tude to the ancestors, the songs combine prayer and celebration. They may also
convey a personal observation or comment on a particular issue in the village.
Cryptic or metaphorical references to specific situations may obscure a song’s
meaning to all but the performers. This makes accurate translation difficult.
   In intonjane, the lead singer usually sings every line twice or more, thus setting
the pace, tune, and rhythm. In accompaniment, the other women sing “yho - yho -
yho” for the duration of the song, and repeat the last word of each line after the lead
singer. Certain songs, like the first, express a girl’s coming of age and her readiness
for initiation. Here the father, as in Song Five, is addressed as “father of the initi¬
ated girl”; this new status is likely to be a source of gratification to him—a “pleas¬
ing name.” The girl’s mother is also praised by being addressed through her clan
name, Majolinkomo. The singers express good wishes, praying for the protection of
the girl against “whores” who might be jealous of her virginity. Toward the end of
the first song (lines 11-13), the father’s clan names are declaimed by one of the
women, anticipating the future marriage and the cattle it will bring him.
   Some songs, like the second, joyously invite the whole community to witness the
girl’s good behavior and growing maturity. Other songs, as in the third, admonish
the girl to exercise self-control when she is sexually aroused—as a sign of maturity
and a safeguard of her virginity. The fourth song glances wistfully at the women’s
own youthful days, and the fifth makes pointed critical comment on a particular
issue within the village community. It was acceptable for ^ man to have a mistress
who would be known by his wife and relatives. She would be expected to support the
wife and to help the husband to care for his family. The sixth song thus reprimands
Lekendlana’s mistress for failing to live up to these expectations. The seventh song
highlights the moral demand that the initiation ritual exacts on the initiates. The girl
is probably no longer a virgin, but still needs her mother’s guidance.
   Songs One and Five were recorded in 1999 from the Xhosa radio station
Umhlobo Wenene (True Friend) in Port Elizabeth. The other songs were performed
by a group of women in April 1999, at KwaTuku B in Peddie, Eastern Cape, and
recorded by Sisi Maqagi and Thandiwe Majola, the daughter of one of the per¬
formers, Nokwanda Majola.
                                               Zingisa Guzana and V. M. Sisi Maqagi


                                          ♦


508   ♦   1990s and 2000s
Song One: The Girl Has Come of Age
Iyho - yho - yho the girl has come of age
Father of the initiated girl is now called
with a pleasing name
Yho - yho - yho Majolinkomo
Yho - yho - yho the girl has come of age
Father of the initiated girl
We have asked since yesterday, praying
These whores Majolinkomo
Father of the initiated girl
Ha - la - a - a - a - la
Cattle of Mtika
Of Jotela
Of Mazeleni
You continue to act this way
Hoyi - ho - ho it is a wonder


Song Two: Come All
Come all, come and listen
Even you whores
You finally spoke
Pity you cry
You man
You will regret in the future
A selection has been made
Ho - ho - ho


Song Three: Be of Age Girl
Be of age girl
Control yourself even if you are sexually aroused
It is the vagina which is like this
This thing is like this!


Song Four: Today I Think of the Past
Today I think of the past
While the sun is going down


Song Five: Father of Ntonjane
Yho, yho father of ntonjane
Yho, yho father of ntonjane
Your child has come of age


Song Six: Mistress of Lekendlana
Mistress of Lekendlana
Ha! Why are you behaving so badly?


                            Intonjane—Xhosa Initiation Songs   ♦   509
Song Seven: YhoYho Father
Yho! yho! he! he! father
Yelele father ho! ho! ha!
I will remain behind
I am not going through with initiation
Ho! I behaved shamefully
I will still need my mother
Ho! he - ha - ha - ha

                                                   Translated by Zingisa Guyana




          NyaMutango (Ntumba Machai),
      Mutondo—Nyemba Initiation Songs
                            Namibia 1999       Nyemba


Songs and rituals restricted to female attendance are regarded as “women’s secrets.”
One female ritual called mutondo, a generic word for tree, used to be performed
when a girl had her first menstruation. Although mutondo is sometimes performed
by women in western Zambia, it has probably become obsolete in Angola and
Namibia. While many young men are still circumcised, mutondo is no longer per¬
formed. Most people cite the war in Angola and the growing influence of the
churches as the reason for this disappearance. Elderly women may instruct young
female relatives privately about sexuality. The women interviewed about their
experience of mutondo complained that mothers these days only find out that their
daughters have started menstruating when they come home pregnant.
  The songs printed here emerged from three interviews held in 1999 in Kehemu, at
the homestead of Ntumba Machai, called NyaMutango, and her family. NyaMutango,
a Iauma speaker, was perhaps seventy years old, born by the Lomba River. She and her
husband left for Zambia in 1971 and migrated to Namibia in 1995. Two older female
relatives joined the first and second interviews. During the third interview with
NyaMutango, her husband and son were present and also spoke. The three translators
were younger relatives. I did the recordings. Before the interviews began, men and
children were sent away and the interviews were held in whispers amid much laughter
and giggling.
   On the day a girl first menstruated, she would be taken into the bush by the
elderly women of the community, most of them female relatives. The girl’s mother
did not participate. Around a mukula tree, or more exceptionally a muvulia tree,
the ground was cleared. For every day the girl bled, the tree was cut so that its red
fluid came out. As the girl drank this fluid, the initiation ceremony began and the
women began to sing songs like “Here it comes, the lingongo of my daughter”
(Song One). Ntumba Machai described lingongo as a big female chief with strong
speeches, who burns all the bad things and brings good things. The oriole, which
is addressed in the song, was called a chief; it always speaks the truth.
   The initiate lived isolated' in the bush for some time, assisted by an older woman,
called cilombolo, who brought her food and other necessities. She instructed her about



510   ♦   1990s and 2000s
marriage, sexual life, and taboos. It was important that a girl learn correctly how
to    dance with her husband when having sex. The old women taught the initiate
appropriate movements and they accompanied the movements with songs, as in Song
Two below.
     Women were not allowed to go anywhere near a male circumcision camp, and sim¬
ilarly, a man passing a womens mutondo was liable to be beaten severely. Part of the
initiation ceremony was called mukanda ua kutuka varnala (the initiation camp to
insult the men). Song Four is an example of a derisive song. On the last day of the
ceremony the initiate admitted her limited knowledge and the necessity of being
taught by elderly women about sexual matters (see Song Five). The older women then
showed their private parts, but the girl was not supposed to look. The older women
had become makisi      dancers with body-paint who represented the ancestors. The
makisi lined up and the girl crawled between their legs while being beaten with whips
made from branches. This experience taught the girl about the secret of the makisi.
     When she returned to the village as a muali (a newly initiated girl), she was
dressed and adorned beautifully and wore a veil. All her in-laws to-be would also
come with gifts since she was now ready for marriage. The songs sung during the
girl s return were sung by everyone and were accompanied with drumming. She was
led into the center of the village where she and her future husband were seated on a
reed mat. The girl s veil was lifted and her clothes were taken off until she was bare¬
breasted. She would stand as people around her sang songs about her return. These
songs often used language with double meanings, thus the women present knew that
mbaka, mostly used for “coastal lands” or “town” referred to menstruation. The girl
then proceeded to the meeting-house, where she touched the beard of an old man.
She would sing “Dance-dance” (Song Six), signifying that she was ready for sexual
experiences. The girl and her husband-to-be withdrew into a hut, and the girl, under
the supervision of the cilombolo, put her newly acquired skills into practice. After
this, the girl climbed on top of her mother’s hut, where a needle, symbolizing the
penis, had been erected. She threw it away. Now, after having touched the beard of
the man, she no longer feared such matters. This concluded the ceremonies.
                                                                       Inge Brinkman


                                          ♦

     Song One
     Here it comes, the lingongo of my daughter,
     It comes to destroy the house.
     Here it comes, the lingongo of my daughter,
     It comes to destroy the house.
     Here it comes, the lingongo of my daughter,
     It comes to destroy the house.
     Oriole, what has it carried?
     Burning, burning.
     Here it comes, the lingongo of my daughter,
     It comes to destroy the house.




                               Mutondo—Nyemba Initiation Songs                ♦   511
  Song Two
  A little, you turn your hips around
  A big, you turn your hips around
  A little, you turn your hips around
  Child, let me tell you.
  A little, a little, you turn your hips around.


  Song Three
  How did I give birth? The girdle.
  H ow did I give birth? The girdle I tie around my waist.
  How did I give birth? The girdle.
  The whole day. The girdle I tie around my waist.
  How did I give birth? The girdle.
  Every night. The girdle I tie around my waist.
  How did I give birth? The girdle.
  [Turning to each other.] The girdle I tie around my waist.


  Song Four
  We found a man collecting honey, he had large testicles
  We found a man collecting honey, he had large testicles
  We found him climbing the tree with large testicles
  We found a man collecting honey, he had a big penis
  Chorus:
  When we sing the penis dance
  (repeats four times)


  Song Five
  Have you ever seen this big penis?
  No, oh no, I just saw my first menstruation
  Without knowing this, ee.
  Have you ever seen this big vagina?
  No, oh no, I just saw my first menstruation
  Without knowing this, ee.


  Song Six
  Dance-dance
  Oh, today, we will touch
  Oh mother, mama, today I will touch
  The beard ol the lion.


      Translated by Rebecca Kastherody, Dominga Antonio, and Sarah Machai



                            \




512   ♦   1990s AND 2000s
       Communal, SETSWANA WEDDING SONGS
                           Botswana 1999       Setswana


Traditionally, brides in Botswana marry in their late teens and early twenties.
Advice to them includes how to endure domestic hardship with fortitude and, on
the other hand, hints at reasons for wanting to escape. The songs themselves are
brief, but are performed over extended periods of time, with repetition and dance
accompanied by percussion or other instruments. The examples provided here were
written down from memory by Nobantu Rasebotsa and myself: we’ve heard them
throughout our lives and performed them, communally, at the weddings of rela¬
tives and friends.
   The first song, “Malala Swi,” is included here as a significant narrative between
a young woman and her maternal uncle in which she respectfully resists his
amorous advances. In many ethnic communities in Botswana, a special relationship
exists between a man and his sister’s children. It is he who makes arrangements for
their ritual initiation into adulthood, who contributes most of the cattle that make
up their “bride-price,” who provides his nephews with “seed capital” in the form of
pregnant heifers, who often is much closer to his nieces and nephews than their
biological father. This relationship is continuously strengthened by a constant
exchange of gifts called mashori when made by the nieces and nephews, which
their uncle then has to tlhapisa in reciprocation. Most commonly, when one
slaughters a beast, one traditionally reserves the head of the beast as mashori for
one’s maternal uncle. Also, his own and his sister’s children, being cross-cousins,
are allowed to marry each other and to engage in overt, risque verbal exchanges
with each other. The uncle in Song One seems to be mistaking himself for one of
his own children by making the sexual advance. That his niece rejects him is prob¬
ably not a mark of feminism but of socially defined censure, indicating that uncles
are not supposed to behave in this manner.
   In the title of Song One, the root Tala” in “malala” means to sleep somewhere
overnight. As the response to the narrator’s call, “swi” not only punctuates the song
but also allows her to exclaim at various points.
   The wedding songs proper are sung and danced when the bride leaves her par¬
ents’ home and arrives at the home of her parents-in-law. In recent times they con¬
trast with the Christian hymns of church ceremonies and are sung when the bride
and bridegroom arrive for luncheon and are escorted from their car to their table
by the matrons of both families, carrying aloft baskets full of grain, stamping the
ground with pestles, and sweeping it with brooms.
   In Song Two, the word “cake” is a translation of Setswana “kuku,” which comes
from the Afrikaans “koek” and refers to female genitalia.
                                                                     Leloba Molema


                                         ♦




                                             Setswana Wedding Songs          *   513
  Song One: Malala Swi
  I went on a journey with my uncle, malala swi
  After a while we rested, malala swi
  He said, “Niece, where are the ‘heads’ due me?” malala swi
  I said, “What do you mean, ‘heads,’ uncle?” swi, swi, swi
  He said, “Everything is ‘heads,’ malala swi
     a thigh is also ‘heads.’” swi, swi, swi
  I said, “I’m not slept on whilst lying on my back, malala swi
      I’m young and will become pregnant,”
  Swi, swi, swi, malala swi


  Song Two: Sweep, Sweep, Sweep Girl
  Sweep, sweep, sweep girl,
  Sweep girl you will see wonders when we’ve gone
  My aunt is a bully,
  A bully of a woman
  Sweep girl, you will see wonders.


  Cakes are sweet,
  Marriage is hard
  Sweep girl, you will see wonders.


  Song Three: Don’t Say Oh!
  Don’t say oh! don’t say oh! don’t say oh!
  You said that you love him.


  Song Four: Come Out and See
  Come out, come out, come out and see
  The child is like a bright star.


  Song Five: Look at the Sun
  Look at the sun, they’ve placed it far away
  The mothers, the women, have put it far away
  There it is, look at it, they’ve put it far away
  The mothers, the women, have placed it far away.


                                                Translated by Leloba Molema




                            I




514   4   1990s AND 2000s
              Elizabeth Dube,              GOOD AS DEAD
                           Zimbabwe 2000         siNdebele


In 1980, Zimbabwe attained its independence after ninety years of colonial rule
under the British. However, in Matabeleland, home to the Ndebele who make up 20
percent of Zimbabwe’s population, peace was short-lived. In mid-1982, in order to
deal with what was called a “dissident problem,” Prime Minister Robert Mugabe
unleashed the specially trained Filth Brigade on the region (Mugabe’s party had
been defeated in Matabeleland, while winning the general election). He called this
brigade Gukurahundi, which means “the storm that washes away the rubbish left over
from the last harvest before the spring rains.” People who experienced its brutality
have never forgotten the horror inflicted by this brigade. In the space of a few weeks,
thousands ol innocent civilians had been massacred, their bodies dumped in mass
graves, down mine shafts, or left to rot in the sun and be scavenged by animals.
Thousands of others had been tortured and had their entire homesteads destroyed.
   The killings continued off and on through the next several years until 1987. The
families of those who suffered such a fate are still deeply pained by the memories and
struggle to come to terms with the past. They believe that the spirits of their mur¬
dered dead are not at peace and continue to cause problems for the living. One of the
hardest things for victims of those years is their inability to understand why they were
targeted in this way. Dissidents were very few in number, and the vast majority of
those who died were innocent. They understood the violence of the liberation war, but
have never been able to explain to themselves the suffering of the Gukurahundi years.
   Elizabeth Dube’s family suffered five murders in the space of a few weeks in
1984. Her account of some of these murders and how they have affected her life
comes from an interview I conducted as director of a Matebeland-based non¬
governmental organization, Amani Trust, which works exclusively with survivors
of torture and organized violence with the aim of helping to mend the social fab¬
ric damaged by successive civil disturbances in this region of Zimbabwe.
                                                                            Shari Eppel

                                           ♦

It is very painful, what happened to our family in 1984. God seemed to have
decided that our family did not deserve to live, and directed all the torrent
of His storm in our direction. It was as if a powerful river swept my family
away, so many of the Dube family died. If I talk about it now, my heart
beats faster and I have a blurred vision. I lose my breath with the pain. It
was as if God had decided we were dirt that should be washed away.
  All that I am about to describe happened before my eyes, and the eyes
of my family. People died one after another; they were like leaves on the
ground. We were all as good as dead then; there was no saying from one
day to another who would die next. There was no order nor reason for
whom they killed; there was no understanding nor explanation, even until


                                                            Good as Dead        ♦   515
today. This gave me the courage to do some of the things I am going to tell
you all about—I was as good as dead in any case and my life, like all oth¬
ers, was worth nothing and could not be counted on. They came to try to
kill us all, that was clear; they wanted to wipe us all out and start their own
next generation in our place. So I thought of myself as dead at that time,
and a dead person has courage to do things that a living person who val¬
ues their life is too afraid to do. . . .
   I would like to tell everyone the story of Busani and how he was beaten
to death and thrown into a dam. The day that Busani died was a day like
any other. Busani was my cousin, a young man and new to our community.
I had asked for him to come and help me with the cattle herding, and he
had not been there long. He arrived just before the Fifth Brigade began
their terror in our community. I had realized by this time that young men
in particular were at risk with this brigade. I had heard what they had done
the previous week, when they had tied two young men from the village to
a tree by their feet, and had then beaten them to death, like that, with their
heads dangling near the ground. They were just any two boys—they had
done nothing wrong. The whole village saw this happen, and many others
were beaten on that day, women and school children too.
      So I knew about the cruelty of those soldiers. They arrived at my homestead
on the morning of this day, and began their abuse of me. “Where are the dis¬
sidents that you cook for?” They would ask such questions and then beat
before you could even answer. You would just find yourself lying on the ground
being kicked and beaten. I was made to take my cooking utensils out of the
kitchen and into the bush to cook for the soldiers. I carried the pots out into
the forest, and began to cook for these men, my heart beating with fear.
  Then I saw Busani approaching, coming to herd the cattle into their pen.
I was so afraid, I knew that if the soldiers saw him, they would do some¬
thing terrible to him. I tried to warn him that the soldiers were nearby, that
he should hide, but he was not paying me attention.
  He started to come nearer, as he wanted to pick up his jersey. “Leave
your jersey!” I was trying to warn him to run away, but he just kept on com¬
ing to pick up the jersey. It was a cream jersey, I cari still see it. And as he
picked up the jersey, the soldiers saw him and grabbed him. So really, you
could say he died because he stopped to pick up that jersey on that day.
Something as small as that could be the death of you then.
   The soldiers picked up sticks and started to beat Busani. I could hear his
cries and I was so full of fear and pain. I could no longer see properly and I
was trying not to hear his cries. I could hear the blood rushing in my ears and
in front of my eyes I could see nothing. While some soldiers beat him, oth¬
ers were telling me to dish their food. I was in such a terrible state and could
not see properly, so I began to dish the soldiers’ porridge onto the ground and
not onto the plates. This made the soldiers angry. They shouted at me, but
they stopped beating Busahi. They said that the boy and I had to eat all the
porridge that had been dished onto the ground. I could not eat anything, I


516     ♦   1990s and 2000s
was too afraid, but they made Busani eat it all, covered with soil and leaves.
  Then they put handcuffs on Busani and took him away. That was the
last time I saw him alive. But I heard from others that they led that poor
boy through the bush, beating him and saying things like, “You are a dis¬
sident, where have you put your gun?” When you are in a situation like
that, you will say anything to stop the beating, agree with all accusations if
you think it will help. And Busani was saying, “Yes, I know the dissidents,
I will show you their guns." Of course he could not, because there were no
dissidents in our area. But he took them to the dam, saying he would find
guns there, hoping to buy time, I suppose. Of course at the dam he could
not find guns, and so they killed him and threw him into the water.
  I was the one to find him, but that was seven whole days later. I was
herding the cattle there to drink, and I noticed that they were very nervous
of something, and they would not go down to the water. I was coming
behind them, and suspected something. I, too, was afraid at that—the sol¬
diers were still around and I was afraid they were at the water. My dog was
whimpering and running to the water and back to me.
   I knew I had to establish what was going on, so I went very carefully to
the edge of the water. And then I could see that there was something float¬
ing in the water, out in the middle. At first I was confused, could not recog¬
nize what the object was—and then I identified that jersey, that cream jersey.
It was Busani floating face down in the water, and all I could see was that
jersey, the one that cost him his life, and the glint of handcuffs behind his
back where he floated. That jersey floating, a pale shade of coffee—that is
the image I can recall. I felt the blood rushing to my head and I felt faint. I
did not know what to do. What could I do? A woman there on her own, and
now I have discovered this poor dead child, who was my relative, and who
had come to the region because I had requested him to herd my cattle.
  I went straight home to bed. I stayed in my bed all night, but could find
no rest. This boy was my responsibility—I was going to have to do some¬
thing about this situation. He could not float there, rotting, and scaring the
cattle forever. But everyone was so afraid, including me. I, too, was so
afraid.
   I realized that if I did not do something, he would float and decompose
forever. So the next day, I went to tell the village head what I had found.
“My child is in the dam. I know people are afraid, but we must take him
out.” Actually, the headman was very afraid. He said that if the soldiers
caught us taking him from the water, then we would also be killed. I told
him, if the soldiers want to kill anybody for doing that, they can kill me, I
consider myself dead anyway. They had killed Busani for nothing; sooner
or later they would kill me and they might then just as well kill me trying
to bury Busani.
   I think this made those men a bit ashamed, that I as a woman should be
braver than them in this situation, and so they agreed to come with me. But
they were not planning well—they were so scared. I told them to meet me


                                                     Good as Dead       ♦   517
at the water. I was the one who had to fetch a spade and some plastic bags
and a blanket, and I took my dog with me as well. I went down to the water
and there I had to wait for them to come. I sat on a rock next to the water’s
edge, and looked at poor Busani, floating swollen and rotten in the dam.
  It was awful for the men. They waded out into the water to pull him to
shore. The dam was not that deep, but the corpse was hard to handle.
Busani had been many days in the water by then and was quite decom¬
posed. As the men tried to steer him to shore and float his body to the
edge, the flesh fell off the bones in their hands—that is how rotten he was.
Their fingers just went straight through his flesh: he was disintegrating,
still with the jersey and the handcuffs on.
    While they rescued his body, I was looking for a place to bury him.
There was an ant bear hole nearby, an animal’s hole. Usually you only bury
dogs in such a place, but the ground was very hard as it was a drought time,
and we had to be quick. Nobody had time or energy to dig deep in such
circumstances, so I took the spade and opened the animal den for Busani.
I also collected big stones to cover the entrance in due course.
  The men brought Busani out, and were in a state of nerves and were also
shocked by the state of the body. They wanted to bury him then and there,
as fast as they could, just shove him quickly in the hole and leave. But I
had been thinking about the handcuffs. They did not belong to us and I
was worried that if we buried Busani with the handcuffs, then in a few
days’ time the Fifth Brigade might come looking for them. They would
beat us if they discovered that we had buried the handcuffs and might even
force us to exhume the body to retrieve their property. Also, I did not want
Busani to be buried in handcuffs.
   So that is why I did it, the thing I did next. I told the men to lie Busani
on his side, so that the handcuffs were visible. His flesh was shredding off,
and the handcuffs had dug right into his arm, so that they were now partly
buried in his flesh, which was soapy and sloppy and white with decay. I picked
up a spade—like this—high in the air, and then hit his wrists as hard as I
could with the blade of the spade. Although the flesh was soggy, the bones
were hard, and I had to hit him several times to cut the hands right off. When
I finally severed them, the impact of my blows meant that the hands shot
away from him, they were displaced quite a distance from his arms, and the
handcuffs dropped to the ground between the hands and the body.
  The men were astonished at me doing this. But I was as good as dead
then; fear was not an issue at that point. Actually I was angry too at what
had happened, and did not want Busani to lie there in the handcuffs of the
killers.
  I picked up the hands which were falling to pieces and put them with
the rest of the body in the blanket, and we rolled him all up together still
in his coffee-coloured jersey, and buried him like that, his hands were
buried along with the rest of him. The smell of the body was so bad that
we had to work fast.


518   ♦   1990s AND 2000s
   But as for the handcuffs, I picked them up and wrapped them in a plas¬
tic bag, all stinking and with bits ol Busani’s flesh still on them, and I took
them away. I just thought to myself, I am a dead person now anyway,
Busam died for nothing and now I feel dead too. I was a dead person at
that moment.
   And what did I do with those handcuffs? Having them made me angry;
they reminded me of the fact that Busani died for nothing. When the Fifth
Brigade called a meeting and made everyone attend, 1 went and I took the
handcuffs with me. At the meeting, 1 just walked straight up to the sol¬
diers, the ones I had been forced to cook for, and I just gave them the
handcuffs, just like that, still wrapped in the plastic since the day we buried
Busani. I just gave them straight to the soldiers. I wanted to ask them, why
did they kill Busani, who was new to the area and knew nothing about dis¬
sidents? I did not have the words to ask them, but giving them the hand¬
cuffs was a way of telling them to their faces that I knew of their crime, I
knew what they had done at the dam. Yes, the handcuffs were the proof of
that and words were not necessary.
   I thought they would kill me but I did not care. I was angry, but of
course I was also so afraid. I expected blows to follow, but all the same, I
just stood there in front of all those witnesses and gave them the hand¬
cuffs. But they did not hit me. They took the handcuffs from me and did
not say one word. In silence, they took that pair of handcuffs and said
nothing. There was nothing to say, they had no answer to the question that
the handcuffs were asking. They could not say why they killed that child,
and so they said nothing.
  To this day, I think I am one of the few people in our region that did
something that silenced those cruel men. For one minute, I think they had
nothing to say because the handcuffs left them without words to justify
Busani’s murder and all their other crimes at that time.
  I have never been able to forget that incident. I cannot forget it. . . .
  My father and my brother were the next to die, a few weeks later. They
were shot to death at night in their beds, in my homestead. My brother
died with his stomach shot right out of him, his intestines hanging off the
side of the bed to the floor. My father tried to cover his face with his hands
as Fifth Brigade stood over him and shot him. The bullets went straight
through his body and his head, and his fingers were blown to pieces by the
bullets. His hands were shot off.
  When I think of Busani now, I see him coming down the road towards
me, looking for his jersey, and I am trying to warn him to leave the jersey
and run away. My vision goes and I want to cry; I cannot see or think when
I have that image, because I know what happens next. . . .
   Busani’s spirit is not at rest. People have seen his spirit—it wanders
around the area, in the form of a pale light, near the ant bear hole where he
is buried. He is not happy to be buried in such a place. He is not peaceful—
he is lost. I feel so sad when I see that light, and remember how sorrowful


                                                     Good as Dead      ♦   519
Busani is at what happened to him. What he wishes for is to be taken out
of that place and to be given a decent funeral witnessed by all his family, as
is everybody’s right. I would like his body to be removed from that place, so
that all can witness for themselves what happened to Busani, how he was
murdered and had to have his hands amputated in order not to lie in hand¬
cuffs. All this needs to be witnessed. Then his spirit will be at peace, and I
will be able to think of that time without this panic, without the deep pain
that rests just here in my heart.

                                                         Transcribed by Shari Eppel
                                  Translated by Shari Eppel and Nicholas Ndlovu




          Unity Dow, CARING FOR THE DYING
                             Botswana 2000       English


Born in 1949, Unity Dow has distinguished herself in several areas. She cofounded
the Women and Law in Southern Africa Research Project in 1989 and the Baobab
Primary School in Gaborone, Botswana, in 1991. She also founded the Metlhaetsile
Women’s Center in 1990 and was its director until 1998, when she was appointed
judge of the High Court, the first woman in Botswana to attain that position. She
was also the first lawyer in Botswana to draw the attention of the courts to a law
that discriminated against Botswana women who married foreign nationals (see the
text “Citizenship: An Open Letter to the Attorney-General”). Married to an
American, Dow personally struggled to gain the rights of Botswana citizenship for
her children. She won the cast, Attorney General v. Unity Dow, in 1990.
   This excerpt from Far and Bey on—Dow’s first novel—offers a realistic view of HIV-
AIDS. Set in Botswana during the rapid escalation of HIV-AIDS fatalities, the novel
focuses on the distraught and desperate members of the community as they bury their
dead, deal with their grief, and anticipate the imminent deaths of other loved ones.
                                                                    Nobantu Rasebotsa

                                          ♦

She used to be a proud woman. Tall, poised, nose slightly turned up. Lips set
in the permanent promise of a smile. She had been poor too. Materially poor,
that is. But proud. She used to have a quiet dignity. A dignity some people
are born with and others spend years trying to acquire. She was not any of
these anymore. She was hardly human anymore. Mosa watched her as she lay
under a tree, looking like something that had survived a fire. If what she had
become could be described as survival under any circumstances. She was the
colour of tar, an unhealthy black-grey, and her hair was thin and reddish.
   Next to her sat her daughter Bibi, dazed. Although she was about two
years old, she had stopped walking months ago and slid about on her bottom.


520   ♦   1990s AND 2000s
She moved very little. She had nowhere to go. Mosa thought she looked like
some strange bird. Her neck was stretched and her mouth looked like a
chopped oft beak. Her neck was rigid. Her eyes occasionally swivelled from
side to side, otherwise they were on her mother, as if she was afraid should
she move away, or even look away, her mother might just disappear. It was
perhaps a testimony to the power of the maternal bond that the little girl still
saw, in this blackened, horizontal remnant of humanity, her mother.
   Mosa was sitting on a wooden bench with two other women. They had
come to see Cecilia, who had been moved out of the hot tin-roofed house
for some air. Tears welled up as Mosa looked at this human being who was
once so full of life. One of the women unable to hold back her tears stood
up and left without a word. So much pain. So little hope. So many dying.
So many children watching as their loved ones waste away and die. Many
little faces full of fear and confusion. So little time to love the living as all
emotions go into caring for the dying.
   “I am sick, Mosa. I am sick,” was all Cecilia could manage to whisper.
   Mosa had nothing to offer in reply. She could not bring herself to offer
any assurances about getting well soon. Her eyes moved from Cecilia’s to
the little girl’s face. In response to her mother’s words Bibi had moved
closer to her and was now gripping her thumb. Cecilia’s hands were no more
than a collection of bones. Bones reaching for bones, thought Mosa as she
watched the little girl’s bony fingers wrap around her mother’s bony thumb.
Could the human warmth the child was seeking possibly be found in that
lifeless hand?
   “Do you want me to take her away for a while. To get her to play with
other children?” Mosa asked.
   “No, no. I have to see her. Do not take her away? She will not let you
anyway. She will not agree to go.” Her voice, though low, was clear. She
began to cough, her sunken chest heaving and heaving, as if it would just
split open right there.
   “Can I talk to you, Mosa? I need to ask you a favour.”
   The other woman left the shade in response and went to join Cecilia’s
mother and other members of the family sitting under another tree some
distance away.
   “Will you go to Kagiso Office? You know the office for women and chil¬
dren. I want Bibi’s father to pay child support. Before I die, I want to know
someone will support her. Do you know anything about such things?”
  Cecilia’s voice was fading and Mosa had to move closer to listen. This
meant sitting on the mat next to the dying woman. Mosa was quite sure
Cecilia had TB but this was no time to think about personal dangers.
Cecilia, lying on her side, grabbed Mosa’s hand and Mosa was surprised,
even alarmed, at the power in that grip. For a brief moment she panicked.
What if I cannot get her to let me go?
 “I have only been at the place once. But I do not know if they can help.
Yes I will go and find out for you.”


                                              Caring for the Dying       ♦   521
      “You have to do it fast. I do not have a lot of time left. But I will not die
until I am sure that something has been done. Please hurry.” Having made
her request, Cecilia let go of Mosa’s hand and closed her eyes. Was she dead?
Was she dying? But she seemed to be dozing off. Mosa stood up and bid the
rest of the family farewell. She looked once more at little Bibi and then her
tears came rolling down. She thought of the saying that one can return to all
previous homes, except for the most precious of all, one’s mother’s womb. Bibi
was indeed trying to be as close to that home as possible, laying her head on
her mother’s belly. Her eyes still closed, the mother winced with pain. But she
did not push the child away. As if sensing Mosa’s thoughts, she uttered, “Let
her be. This pain cannot compare with the pain of leaving her behind.”
   Mosa hurried away, like the woman before her, leaving the yard with
rigid shoulders, trying to hide the anguish she felt. The family had plenty
to deal with and did not have the time to comfort those who had come
offering comfort to begin with.
   Mosa’s anguish was compounded by her knowledge that similar scenarios
were playing themselves out in many homes in the wards, villages and towns
countrywide: young people dropping like kernels from a maize cob in the
hands of a greedy man. Her own brothers’ deaths had gone the same way.



               Yvette Christianse, GENERATIONS
                    South Africa 2001     English and Afrikaans


Yvette Christianse was born in Doornfontein, Johannesburg, in 1954. Her family
moved first to Swaziland in order to leave apartheid, then settled in Australia in
the late 1970s. After training as a teacher and working as a journalist and editor,
Christianse graduated with a doctorate in English literature from the University of
Sydney in 1998. In 1997 she joined Fordham University, New York, as an assistant
protessor. Her fiction and poetry (along with scholarly writing) has been published
in Australia and the United States, and she has received one of Australia’s highest
honors for poetry, the Harri Jones Memorial Prize.
   Christianse began writing as a six year old, encouraged by storytelling from her
grandmother, grandfather, and mother. At thirteen she recognized how sharply her
experiences of the world differed from the writers read at school, and as a young
woman in Sydney, she found the words to start writing about apartheid without the
sensationalism it so readily offered through its spectacle of violence and cruelty.
Graceful, courageous, and nuanced, her verse draws together the sacramental and
the elemental, narratives of exploration and exile, the voices of emperors and slaves.
Her first volume, Castaways (1999), opens on St. Helena, where her grandmother
was born, and ends in the present, with a young woman’s “voyage out,” far from the
slave past yet still “hungering for / steady ground.” “Generations,” hitherto unpub¬
lished and part of a longer work called “Requiem for a Republic,” again reflects on
journeys of desire, its voice both somber and sanguine.
                                                                      Dorothy Driver
                                         ♦


522     ♦   1990s and 2000s
                   Do not believe everything you hear

The dream holds here. It circles itself, holds
like talk that recalls two decades at the end of an evening
and those who have tried to find their Jerusalems
find, with each moment of rest, the way that the land
inhales them
     Heera, Vader van Genaade
      Gee my dag en klere
     Kinders maak ek myself1
Children who come here, come in troops
as if chained to a circus—their dear voices
are locked in the thrall of a song that will please
endless rows of the inner circle. We, we who are chained
to the walls of our childhood, salute you
and we give you our prayers while you surge ahead
like the storm of a ship that ploughs itself
into the distance of a new land, a land
your yesterdays can only imagine.
Do not forget us
      Ons het jou lief
      Ons onthou julle
      Ons onthou julle, hoor 2
The point is that we speak softly.
We speak at gravesites where stone is,
implacably, the voice we cannot understand.
We carve ourselves into a lack of meaning
and we set off again. We press on,
deep into the destination of the past.
We sail, like vessels built for these waves.
And these waves are as if sand.
And we are like children ourselves, children
who have been told that the sand will overtake us,
like trees and other vegetation overtaken by dunes
at the edge of the waves.
     Bid vir ons. Versoek ons.
     0 kinders van die toekomstig
     van die onbelowe, bid vir ons 3
Extreme are our ways and our lives are blown
by the idea of horizons that lie deep in scriptures
that are the measure of dreams. We beseech thee,
we beseech thee and thy generations. For you are ours
and our lives have been laid down in the trenches
of the past as we chain ourselves to the wake


                                                      Generations   ♦   523
  of such ships that storm seas, these seas
  that ring and link themselves to such rhymes
  that circle the world and clip the wings of birds

  1.   Lord, Father of Mercy
       grant me strength and clothes
       children I’ll make myself

  2.   We love you
       We remember you
       We remember you, hear

  3.   Pray for us. Entreat us
       O children of the future
       of the unbelievable, pray for us




                              y



524    ♦   1990s and 2000s
Contributors

Editors

M. J. Daymond is professor and university fellow at the University of
Natal, Durban. She has edited several volumes of fiction by Bessie Head,
Lauretta Ngcobo, and Frances Colenso and co-edited the volume South
African Feminisms: Writing, Theory, and Criticism 1990-1994 (1996). She is
an editor of the journal Current Writing.


Dorothy Driver is professor of English at the University of Cape Town,
with an annual visiting appointment at the University of Chicago and an
adjunct professorship at the University of Adelaide. She has edited books
on Pauline Smith and Nadine Gordimer, and has published essays on Anne
Barnard, Olive Schreiner, Bessie Head, Ellen Kuzwayo, Tsitsi Danga-
rembga, Yvonne Vera, Zoe Wicomb, and others. For twenty years she pro¬
duced the Journal of Commonwealth Literature's annual survey of South
African English literature and literary criticism.


Sheila Meintj es is senior lecturer in political studies at the University of
the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg. She currently serves as a member of
South Africa’s Commission on Gender Equality. In the 1980s she was
active in anti-apartheid women’s organizations in the Cape and in Natal,
and later was a member of the Research Supervisory Group of the
Women’s National Coalition. She is co-editor of The Aftermath: Women in
Tost-Gonflict Transformation (2002).


Leloba Molema is senior lecturer in the department of English at the
University of Botswana and holds a Ph.D. in ethnology from Johannes
Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany. She is the editor of the academic
journal Marang and co-editor, with Nobantu Rasebotsa, of Women
Creating the Future: An Anthology of Womens Writing in Southern Africa
(1998). Her present research interest is in anti-apartheid Afrikaans litera¬
ture written by white South Africans.

Chiedza Musengezi is a founding member and director of Zimbabwe
Women Writers, an organization that nurtures women’s voices through
writing. She studied at the University of Zimbabwe and has worked as a
teacher and editor, in addition to serving as director of the Women and
AIDS Support Network. Several of her short stories and poems have been
published locally and internationally.
Margie Orford is an independent scholar whose interests span book pub¬
lishing and film. She co-edited the anthology Coming on Strong: Writing by
Namibian Women (1996) and subsequently worked with emerging women
writers. Her film work includes the research and conceptualization of a
series of documentaries on women, Stories of Tenderness and Power. She has
written on Namibian literature and was awarded a Fulbright scholarship in
1999.


Nobantu Rasebotsa is senior lecturer in and former head of the depart¬
ment of English at the University of Botswana. She has published on the
fiction of Alex La Guma and Nadine Gordimer, and also writes about
African American literature. With Leloba Molema, she co-edited Women
Creating the Future: An Anthology of Womens Writing in Southern Africa
(1998). Her current research is on HIV-AIDS in African literature.




Associate Editors

Heike Becker is senior lecturer in anthropology at the University of the
Western Cape. She previously taught at the University of Namibia and has
published extensively on gender in Namibian culture and history. Her cur¬
rent research interests are mainly in the field of war, violence, and memory
in northern Namibia.


Devarakshanam Govinden completed her Ph.D. at the University of
Natal, Durban, with a focus on Indian women’s writing. She is former dean
of the faculty of education of the University of Durban-Westville, and has
presented papers locally and internationally on subjects ranging from edu¬
cation in South Africa to women’s writing and women and peace.


Mary Lederer holds a Ph.D. from the University of California, Los
Angeles, where she wrote a dissertation on the work of Bessie Head. She
lectures in the department of English at the University of Botswana, and
her current research focuses on English-language literature set in Botswana.


V. M. Sisi Maqagi      lectures in the department of English at Vista
University, South Africa. She is writing a doctoral dissertation on Bessie
Head. She has published poetry in Kotaz, a Port Elizabeth magazine.


Virginia Phiri is a writer and art critic, as well as a human rights activist.
She speaks seven languages and works in Harare, Zimbabwe, as an
accountant and tax consultant.


Cristiana Pugliese is senior lecturer at the School of Languages at the
University of Potchefstroom, South Africa. She is the author of Author,


526   ♦   Contributors
Publisher and Gikuyu Nationalist: The Life and Writings of Gakaara wa
Wanjau   (1995) and serves on the board of directors of the journal
Englishes: Contemporary Literatures in English.




Translators and Headnote Writers

Yvette Abrahams completed her doctorate on the link between intellectual
and other forms of violence against black women. Her future research proj¬
ects include gender relations in Khoekhoe history, and surviving indige¬
nous knowledge systems among women.


Tuzyline Jita Allan is associate professor of English at Baruch College,
CUNY. She is the author of Womanist and Feminist Aesthetics: A Comparative
Review (1995) and co-editor, with Thomas Fink, of the anthology Literature
Around the Globe (1994). A collection of articles co-edited by Allan and
Helen Mugambi, titled African Masculinities in Literature and Film, is forth¬
coming. Allan is currently writing a book on black transatlantic feminism.


Megan Biesele, Ph.D., has worked with Ju/’hoan San people in Namibia
and Botswana since 1970 as both anthropological researcher and human
rights activist. She serves as the president of the School of Expressive
Culture in Austin, Texas, and as the coordinator for the Kalahari Peoples
Fund, also in Austin. She co-authored Healing Makes Our Hearts Happy:
Spirituality and Transformation Among the Ju/’hoansi of the Kalahari (1997)
with Richard Katz and Verna St. Denis.

Maitseo Bolaane lectures in the history department at the University of
Botswana. She is currently completing work for her Ph.D. at Oxford
University, researching the comparative environmental history of East
Africa and Botswana, and focusing on the relationship between local com¬
munities and wildlife conservation policy.

Inge Brinkman is a member of the department of African languages and
cultures at the University of Ghent, Belgium. She is the editor of Singing in
the Bush: MPLA Songs During the War for Independence in South-East Angola
(1966-1975) (2001) and co-editor of Grandmother’s Footsteps: Oral Tradition
and South-East Angolan Narratives on the Colonial Encounter (1999).


Catherine Burns teaches in historical studies at the University of Natal,
Durban. She researches the social and intellectual history of medicine,
health, and women in Southern Africa, focusing on the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries. She is currently working on two books, one of which
is a biography of Louisa Mvemve.



                                                    Contributors      ♦   527
Chandre Carstens is a graduate student and tutor in the department of
English at the University of Cape Town. Her current research is in the
field of Afrikaans cultural production.


Anthony Chennells is associate professor of English at the University of
Zimbabwe and has published widely on Southern African literature, art,
and religion. With Flora Veit-Wild he edited Emerging Perspectives on
Dambudzo Marechera (1999).


Pam Claassen currently works at the University of Namibia as a research
and publications officer, and resides in Windhoek, Namibia.


David Coplan is      professor and chair in social anthropology at the
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, and has published exten¬
sively on the anthropology of African performing arts. His publications
include the groundbreaking study In Township Tonight! South Africa’s Black
City Music and Theater (1985).


Sarah Dupont-Mkhonza lectures at the University of Swaziland. She is a
writer, activist, and journalist who has written poems, short stories, and
plays in English and siSwati, as well as two novels, Pains of a Maid and
What the Future Holds.


Ingrid de Kok, a poet and critic, is an associate professor in adult educa¬
tion at the University of Cape Town. She has edited books of cultural crit¬
icism and published two volumes of poetry. In addition her poems have
appeared in numerous national and international journals and anthologies.
(See the selection “Our Sharpeville,” 1987, in this volume.)


Elizabeth Elbourne teaches in the department of history of McGill
University, Montreal. Her forthcoming book is entitled Blood Ground:
Missions, Colonialism, and the Contest for Christianity in the Cape Colony and
Britain, 1799-1853 and her research interests include the early nineteenth-
century Cape Colony, women’s history, and the history of religion.


Shari Eppel is a clinical psychologist, human rights historian, and the pri¬
mary author of Breaking the Silence, Building True Peace (1997), the first his¬
torical account of the atrocities of the Mugabe government in Matabeleland
post independence. She is director of the Amani Trust in Bulawayo,
Zimbabwe, an organization devoted to helping victims of torture.


A. C. Fick teaches journalism and media studies at Rhodes University,
South Africa. He has published on representations of subjectivity in South
African literature.



528   ♦   Contributors
Miki Flockemann teaches in the department of English at the University
of the Western Cape. Her primary research interest is the comparative
study of diasporic literatures and the aesthetics of transformation in both
fiction and performance texts.


M. Furusa is a lecturer in the department of African Languages and
Literature (Shona) at the University of Zimbabwe.


Pumla Dineo Gqola is a lecturer in the department of English and
Classical Culture at the University of the Free State, South Africa.


Colette Guldimann has studied and taught at the Universities of Cape
Town and London. Her research and publications focus on Southern
African writing and culture.


Liz Gunner has written widely on African orature and literature. She is
professor of English studies at the University of Natal, Pietermaritzburg.
Her most recent book is The Man of Heaven and the Beautiful Ones of God
/ UMuntu wasezulwini nabantu bahle bakaNkulunkulu: Writings from a
South African Church (2002).


Zingisa Guzana is a lecturer at Vista University, South Africa. Her
research interests are in gender and the translation of women’s writings.


W. Haacke is professor of African languages at the University of Namibia.
He specializes in the linguistics of Khoekhoegowab (Nama/Damara).


Samukele Hadebe is a lecturer in the department of African Languages
and Literature (Ndebele) at the University of Zimbabwe.


Werner Hillebrecht is a librarian and archivist. He compiled the
Namibian bibliographic database NAMLIT and works at the National
Archives of Namibia.


Kaleni Hiyalwa was born in northern Namibia and went into exile at age
twelve. She is a published novelist, poet, and short story writer and lives
and works in Windhoek, Namibia.

Janet Hodgson is a former lecturer in the department of Religious Studies
at the University of Cape Town. Her publications include The God of the
Xhosa (1982), Princess Emma (1987), and, with co-author Jay Kothare,
Vision Quest: Native Spirituality and the Church in Canada (1990).


Diane Hubbard is the co-ordinator of the Gender Research and Advocacy
Project at the Legal Assistance Centre, a public interest law firm based in


                                                   Contributors      ♦   529
Namibia. Her publications include “The Many Faces of Feminism in
Namibia,” co-authored with C. Solomon, in Amrita Basu, ed.,         The
Challenge of Local Feminisms (1995).


Heather Hughes teaches at the University of Lincoln, South Africa. She
has co-authored a bibliography on South African women and is currently
completing a biography of John Dube, the first president of the African
National Congress.

Christopher Hurst is the penname used by Christopher John (M.A.,
Natal). He has worked with community theatre groups in Zimbabwe both
as a teacher and a performer. In       1997 he joined the Drama and
Performance Studies Program at the University of Natal, Durban, as lec¬
turer. He was married to the late Elizabeth Ncube.


Fredricka Ndeshi Immanuel was born in Okaku, Namibia. She went into
exile in 1977 and returned 1991 after independence. She is an educator
whose work focuses on women and children.


Joyce Jenje-Makwenda      is a visiting lecturer at the University of
Zimbabwe. She is also an actress, published writer, and researcher. An
accomplished film producer and director, she researched and directed
Zimbabwe Township Music. She is currently working on a weekly television
series with the Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation.


Ackson M. Kanduza is a graduate of the University of Zambia and holds
a Ph.D. from Dalhousie University, Nova Scotia. He teaches the economic
history of Southern Africa and gender studies at the University of
Swaziland, where he is an associate professor of history.


Cons Uaraisa Karamata was educated in sociology and economics in
Namibia and in Germany. He is a research assistant at the Multi-
Disciplinary Research Centre at the University of Namibia.


Yahmillah Katjirua    translates her mother tongue, otjiHerero, into
English. She has worked for UNICEF in Namibia, and is currently
employed at the Namibian Tender Board.


Kathryn Limakatso Kendall, Ph.D., spent two years at the University of
Lesotho as a Fulbright Scholar and was the editor and amanuensis for
Mpho M’atsepo Nthunya, the author of Singing Away the Hunger: Stories
of a Life in Lesotho (1996).


Tselanngwefela Komerdse completed       his B.A. in humanities at the
University of Botswana, majoring in history and English. He currently


530   ♦   Contributors
teaches social studies and English at Etsha Community Junior Secondary
School in the Okavango region of Botswana.


Writing in Afrikaans, and later also in English, Antjie Krog has published
nine volumes of poetry, one short novel, two children’s books of verse, and
a work of nonfiction stemming from her reporting on South Africa’s Truth
and Reconciliation Commission. (See the selection “The Birth of This
Country’s Language,” 1998, in this volume.)


Desiree Lewis completed her Ph.D. at the University of Cape Town with
a thesis on Bessie Head. She has written on feminist theory, Southern
African writing, and popular culture, and has taught in the English depart¬
ments at the University of the Western Cape and the University of Natal,
Pietermaritzburg. She is presently working at the University of Cape
Town’s African Gender Institute.


Fiona Lloyd is one of the cofounders of WICSA: Southern African
Women in Contemporary Culture. She currently works in Zimbabwe as a
media trainer in conflict areas.


Rene Lotter has worked as a television producer, in Windhoek, Namibia,
and has edited and translated many publications. She was a columnist for
the newspaper The Namibian for several years, and now lives and works in
Cape Town.


Lily Mafela is senior lecturer responsible for training secondary school
history teachers in the Faculty of Education at the University of Botswana.
Following her studies at the University of Botswana, University of Bristol,
and Northwestern University, she did groundbreaking work on women’s
education in precolonial and colonial Botswana.


Born in Soweto in 1979, Rirhandzu Mageza is a final-year undergraduate
student at the University of Cape Town, concentrating on political studies,
as well as gender and women’s studies.


James Mahlaule is a lecturer in the department of linguistics at the
University of Zimbabwe. He lectures in Communication and Language for
Specific Purposes.

Beauty Malope completed her B.A. in humanities at the University of
Botswana, majoring in English and history, and currently teaches social
studies at Maoka Community Junior Secondary School in Gaborone,
Botswana.

Ntongela Masilela is professor of English and world literature at Pitzer


                                                   Contributors     ♦   531
College in Claremont, California. He is also adjunct professor at the
University of California, Irvine.

Mara Miller is a professional German/English translator. She lives and
works in Windhoek, Namibia.

Alpheons Moroke received his B.A. in English from the University of
Botswana and wrote a senior thesis on African American literature by
women. He currently works as a journalist for the Botswana Guardian.


Thulisile Motsa-Dladla is the chief executive officer of an organization
specializing in adult literacy in the Kingdom of Swaziland. She holds a
master’s degree in administration and has worked at various schools in the
country as head of department, deputy head, and principal.


Levi Namaseb was born in the Namib Desert at Khorilgaos. One of six
children, he was brought up by his mother in hunter-gatherer and oral cul¬
ture. He is a lecturer in Khoekhoe literature and linguistics at the
University of Namibia and wishes to promote the San languages after
completing his Ph.D.


Nicholas Ndlovu is a project officer with the Amani Trust in Harare,
Zimbabwe, a charity organization that rehabilitates torture victims. He
works as a counselor and rehabilitation technician.


Lauretta Ngcobo was born and educated in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa,
went into exile in 1969, and returned to South Africa in 1992. She has
published two novels, Cross of Gold (1981) and And They Didn’t Die (1990),
and edited a collection of essays on writing by “blackwomen” in Britain,
Let It Be Told (1988). (See the selection “The Rending of the Veil,” 1981,
in this volume.)


Nepeti Nicanor is a mother and writer who is especially interested in the
development of literature in Africa and the development of African lan¬
guages. She lives with her daughters Leila and Megan in Windhoek,
Namibia.


Abner Nyamende completed his Ph.D. at the University of Cape Town,
where he is senior lecturer in Xhosa and African literature. His research on
African-language literature includes a special interest in oral literature.
Since 2001    he has served as president of the African Languages
Association of Southern Africa. In addition to scholarly articles, he has
published his poetry and fiction both locally and abroad, and co-wrote the
Xhosa book Imbongi Ijong’ Exhantini (1995).



532   ♦   Contributors
Jeff Opland teaches at Charterhouse and at the School of Oriental and
African Studies at the University of London. He is the author of books
and articles on Anglo-Saxon and Xhosa literature, including Anglo-Saxon
Oral Poetry (1980), Xhosa Oral Poetry (1983), and Xhosa Poets and Poetry
(1998).


Candice Petersen studied at the University of Cape Town and in 1996
spent a year in Germany as an exchange student sponsored by Youth for
Understanding. She is the first in her household to attend a tertiary insti¬
tution, and her interests include television, the shifting forms of feminism,
and the contradictory emotions evoked by racial definitions in varying
political contexts.


Karen Press has published five collections of poetry, and her work has
appeared in magazines and anthologies in South Africa, the U.K., the U.S.,
Canada, and France. She has also published children’s stories, short fiction
for adults, and science and mathematics textbooks. She lives in Cape
Town. (See the selection “Krotoa’s Story,” 1990, in this volume.)


Terence Ranger, visiting professor of history at the University of
Zimbabwe, has been researching and writing on Zimbabwean history for
forty-five years. He has written seven books, including Voices from the
Rocks: Nature, Culture, and History in the Matopos Hills of Zimbabwe (1999),
Revolt in Southern Rhodesia, 1896-97: A Study of African Resistance (1984),
and Dance and Society in Eastern Africa, 1890—1970: The Bemi Ngoma
(1975).


Fiona Ross lectures in the department of social anthropology at the
University of Cape Town. Her doctoral research, recently published by
Pluto Press, reflects on women’s testimonies before South Africa’s Truth
and Reconciliation Commission and on women’s experiences of political
activism.

Meg Samuelson is a Mellon fellow and Ph.D. candidate in the department
of English at the University of Cape Town. Her dissertation is on gendered
representations of the nation in post-apartheid South African narratives.


Esther Sbongile Sangweni is senior lecturer and assistant head in the
department of English at the University of Zululand, South Africa.


A professor of African languages and literature at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Harold Scheub has taught and conducted research
in Eastern and Southern Africa. His most recent book is A Dictionary of
African Mythology: The Mythmaker as Storyteller (1999).




                                                    Contributors      ♦   533
Mary Simons is senior lecturer in the department of political studies at the
University of Cape Town. A gender activist and labour and community
mediator during the 1980s and 1990s, she was restricted under the
Suppression of Communism Act (1976—1981) because of her anti¬
apartheid activity. She is currently a member of the Ministerial Advisory
Committee to the Minister of Provincial and Local Government and
recently co-edited One Woman, One Vote: The Gender Politics of South
African Elections (2002).


Rosa Schneider has written on German settler women in Namibia during
the German colonial period, and in particular, their autobiographical and
fictional work. She is currently a freelance teacher in girls’ and women’s
educational programs in Germany.

Gail Smith is contributing editor at The Star newspaper in Johannesburg
and has worked in broadcast and print media internationally. A researcher
and contributor on the documentary film The Life and Times of Sara
Baartman (1998), she is now working on a documentary about the return
of Baartman’s remains to South Africa.


Irene Staunton is the former publisher of Baobab Books in Harare,
Zimbabwe, and is now director of Weaver Press. She is also editor of the
Heinemann African Writers Series.


Dianne Stewart completed her M.A. at the University of Natal, Durban,
where she studied African languages and developed a special interest in
women’s issues. She is an author and freelance journalist whose books for
children are widely translated.


Enamile Tlhobolo completed his B.A. in humanities at the University of
Botswana, majoring in theology and religious studies. He teaches religious
education at Masunga Senior Secondary School near Francistown, Botswana.


Philippa Tucker is an M.A. research student in the department of politi¬
cal studies at the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg.


Elizabeth van Heyningen, Ph.D., is a research associate in the depart¬
ment of historical studies at the University of Cape Town. She has pub¬
lished on the social history of medicine and the history of Cape Town, as
well as on colonial women in South Africa. She is co-author of Cape Town
in the Twentieth Century: An Illustrated Social History (1999).


Wendy Urban-Mead is         a doctoral candidate in African history at
Columbia University and' is completing a dissertation on the Brethren in
Christ Church of Zimbabwe in the colonial period. Her article “‘Girls of


534   *   Contributors
the Gate’: Questions of Purity and Piety at the Mtshabezi Girls’ Primary
School in Colonial Zimbabwe, 1908-1940” was published in Le Fait
Missionaire (August 2001).


Flora Veit-Wild is professor of African literatures at Humboldt
University in Berlin. She lived for ten years in Zimbabwe and has pub¬
lished extensively on Zimbabwean literature. She is a cofounder of
Zimbabwe Women Writers.


Nomfundo Walaza is the director of the Trauma Centre for Survivors of
Violence and Torture in Cape Town. A clinical psychologist, she com¬
pleted her training at the University of Cape Town. She has helped to
shape a gendered response to South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation
Commission.


Linda Waldman is a social anthropologist currently lecturing at Dublin
Business School, Dublin. She has a long association with the towns and
people of the Northern Cape and recently completed a Ph.D. on Griqua
identity in South Africa. This research examines national and local identi¬
ties, looking at the cultural dynamics of gender, status, religion, and poli¬
tics.


Mary Watson is a Sainsbury fellow and graduate student in the depart¬
ment of English at the University of Cape Town. Her research involves
popular forms of literature in postcolonial contexts.


Peggy Watson moved to Zimbabwe from England in 1980 and became
one of the multiracial group of women who, in 1983, formed Women’s
Action Group. She is now a board member of that organization and
authored a history of its formation and work, Determined to Act
(1998). Professionally she has worked as a journalist, teacher, and social
work adviser.

Melanie Yap, former journalist and general secretary of the Chinese
Association of South Africa, is co-author of Colour, Confusion and
Concessions: The History of the Chinese in South Africa (1996), the definitive
history of the local Chinese community.

N. B. Zondi lectures in the isiZulu program at the University of Natal,
Durban. Her teaching and research interests are in Zulu traditional litera¬
ture.




                                                     Contributors      ♦   535
    A




*
Permissions Acknowledgments
and Sources

For previously published texts not in the public domain, the rights holders
are indicated below. Original texts published for the first time in this vol¬
ume are copyrighted in the names of their authors. Except where noted
below, the English-language translations contained in this volume were
commissioned lor this edition and are copyrighted in the names of their
translators. Headnotes contained in this volume were commissioned for
this edition and are copyrighted in the name of the Feminist Press.
Archives and libraries that provided access to rare texts, or gave permission
to reproduce them, are acknowledged below, and sources not indicated in
the headnotes are listed.
   In the case of oral materials, such as interviews and songs, every effort
has been made to locate and gain permission to publish from the original
speaker(s). Anyone who can provide information about copyright holders
who have not been previously located is urged to contact the Feminist
Press. Those seeking permission to reprint or quote from any part of this
book should also contact the Feminist Press at the following address: Rights
and Permissions, The Feminist Press at the City University of New York,
The Graduate Center, 365 Fifth Avenue, Suite 5406, New York, NY 10016.

Anonymous, AUNT, STRETCH OUT THE BLANKET
   Translation © 1994, reprinted by permission of David Coplan from:
Coplan, David. 1994. In the Time of Cannibals: World Music of South Africa’s
Basotho Migrants. Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University Press.

Anonymous, I Am A WAILING FOOL
  Translation © 1994, reprinted by permission of David Coplan from:
Coplan, David. 1994. In the Time of Cannibals: World Music of South Africa’s
Basotho Migrants. Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University Press.

Anonymous, A MOTHER PRAISES Her BABY
  Translation © 1966, reprinted by permission of Willard Trask from:
Trask, Willard, ed. 1966. The Unwritten Song. London: Collier-Macmillan;
New York: Macmillan.

Anonymous, SONG OF THE AFFLICTED
  Translation from: Brown, John Croumbie.           1846. Narrative of an
Exploratory Tour to the North-East of the Colony of the Cape of Good Hope, by
the Revs. T. Arbousset and F. Daumas of the Paris Missionary Society. Cape
Town: A. S. Robertson and Saul Solomon.
Anonymous, THE STORY OF NGANGEZWE AND MNYAMANA
  Text courtesy of the National Library of South Africa, Cape Town.
[Carbutt, Mrs. Hugh Lancaster. 1879. “Ingangegwane: The Story of
Ngangezwe and Mnyamana.” Folk-Lore journal 1(4): 85-97.]

Anonymous, THE WAR IN ZULULAND
  Text courtesy of the Campbell Collections of the University of Natal
(Killie Campbell Africana Library). [Inanda Seminary Papers, File la,
Killie Campbell Collections, University of Natal.]

Beh Nla’an, GIRAFFE SONG
  Text from Biesele, Megan and Thomas Dowson. 1991. Videotape.
Courtesy of Witwatersrand University Film Unit, Johannesburg.

Susiwe Bengu, TESTIMONY OF A SCHOOL GlRL
  Text courtesy of the Campbell Collections of the University of Natal
(Killie Campbell Africana Library). [Inanda Seminary Papers, File la,
Killie Campbell Collections, University of Natal.]

Hilda Bernstein (Tandi), DlARY OF A DETAINEE
   Reprinted by permission of the publisher from: Africa South in Exile 5.2
(1961): 25-47.

Lily Changfoot, Return JOURNEY
   Copyright © 1982 by Lily Changfoot. Reprinted by permission of the
author’s estate from: Changfoot, Lily. 1982. A Many-Coloured South African:
the Diary of a Non-Person. St. Catherines, Ontario: Bonsecours Editions.

Jane Chifamba, The WIDOW AND THE BABOONS
  Reprinted by permission of the publisher from: Chifamba, Jane. 1982.
Ngano Dzepasi Chigare. Gweru: Mambo Press.

Yvette Christianse, GENERATIONS
   Copyright © 2002 by Yvette Christianse. Published by permission of
the author.

Communal, BOJALE—SETSWANA INITIATION SONGS
  Reprinted by permission of the National Museum, Gaborone, (publisher)
from: Motlotle, Ntikwe. 1998. aBojale—Girls Initiation School.” The Zebras
Voice 25.2: 19-21; and Motlotle, Ntikwe. 1998. “Bojale in Kgatleng.” The
Zebra’s Voice 25. 3-4: 22—25.

Communal, INTONJANE—XHOSA INITIATION SONGS
   Copyright © 2002 by KwaTuku Women Singers Group. Published by
permission of the authors.

Communal, Izisho Zokusebenza—Work Songs
  Translation copyright © 1994, published by permission of Dianne



538   ♦   Permissions Acknowledgments and Sources
Stewart from: Songs of Rural 'Zulu Women: Finding a Voice in a Transitional
Society. Unpublished M.A. Thesis. University of Natal, Durban.

Communal, SETSWANA WEDDING SONGS
 Translation copyright © 2002, published by permission of Leloba
Molema and Nobantu Rasebotsa.

Communal, SWAZI WEDDING SONGS
  Translation copyright © 2002 by Thulisile Motsa-Dladla.

Tsitsi Dangarembga, The LETTER
  Copyright © 1985, reprinted by permission of the author from: 1985.
Whispering Land: An Anthology of Stories by African Women. Stockholm:
SIDA.

Jennifer Davids, POEM FOR My MOTHER
   Copyright © 1974, reprinted by permission of the publisher from:
Davids, Jennifer. 1974. Searching for Words. Cape Town: David Philip, 1974.

Ingrid de Kok, OUR SHARPEVILLE
  Copyright © 1987, reprinted by permission of the author from:
TriQuarterly 69 (Spring/ Summer 1987).

Di//xao =Oma, OUR GOVERNMENT           Is A   GLOWING EMBER
  Text from: Biesele, Megan. Unpublished Recording. Nyae Nyae, Namibia.

Paulina Dlamini, FLIGHT OF THE ROYAL HOUSEHOLD
   Copyright © 1986, reprinted by permission of the publisher from:
Bourquin, S., ed. 1986. Paulina Dlamini: Servant of Two Kings. Pietermar¬
itzburg: University of Natal Press.

Unity Dow, CARING FOR THE DYING
  Copyright © 2000, reprinted by permission of the publishers from: Dow,
Unity. 2000. Far and Beyon. Gaborone: Longman Botswana; and Dow, Unity.
2001. Far and Beyon. Melbourne: Spinifex Press.

Elizabeth Dube, GOOD AS DEAD
  Text courtesy of the Amani Trust Archives and Shari Eppel. [Eppel,
Shari. 2000. Clinician interview. Harare.]

Federation of South African Women, WOMEN’S CHARTER
  Text courtesy of FEDSAW. [FEDSAW. 1954. “Report of the First
National Conference of Women.”]

Nadine Gordimer, April 27: The First Time
  Copyright © 1994, reprinted by permission of the author from: Brink,
Andre, ed. 1994. SA 27 April: An Author’s Diary. Cape Town: Queillerie.

Joan Hambidge,   T.M.T. ‘7 T.B.M.G.


                  Permissions Acknowledgments and Sources ♦ 539
   Copyright ©     1989, reprinted by permission of the author from:
Hambidge, Joan. 1989. Kriptonomie. Cape Town: Human and Rousseau.

Hamsi (Marie Kathleen Jeffreys), THOUGH I Am BLACK, I Am COMELY
   Copyright © 2002. Text courtesy of the National Library of South
Africa, Cape Town. [Ref. MSC 64 / 1.1.]

Bessie Head, FOR “NAPOLEON BONAPARTE,” JENNY, AND KATE
   Copyright © 1990, reprinted by permission of the author’s estate from:
Southern African Review of Books (August/October 1990): 12-15.

Florence Nolwandle Jabavu, BANTU HOME LIFE
  Copyright © 1928, reprinted by permission of the publisher from:
Taylor, Rev. J. Dexter, ed. 1928. Christianity and the Natives of South Africa:
A Yearbook of South African Missions. Alice: Lovedale Press.

Noni Jabavu, BUS JOURNEY TO TSOLO
  Copyright © 1963, reprinted by permission of the author from: Jabavu, Noni.
1963. The Ochre People: Scenes from a South African Life. London: John Murray.

Ingrid Jonker, I DRIFT IN THE WIND
  Copyright © 1966, reprinted by permission of the Ingrid Jonker Trust
from: Jonker, Ingrid. 1966. Kantelson. Johannesburg: Afrikaanse Pers-
Boekhandel.

Marevasei Kachere, WAR MEMOIR
  Copyright © 2000, reprinted by permission of the publisher from:
Zimbabwe Women Writers. 2000. Women of Resilience. Harare: Zimbabwe
Women Writers.

Princess Magogo kaDinuzulu, BALLAD OF NOMAGUNDWANE
  Translation © 1976, reprinted by permission of the estate of David
Rycroft from: Rycroft, David. 1976. African Language Studies 16: 60 ff.

Mukwahongo Mekulu Ester Kamati, CHILDREN OF NAMIBIA
   Copyright © 2002 by Mukwahongo Mekulu Este? Kamati. Published by
permission of the author.

Kandjende’s Sister, LETTER FROM KARIBIB
 Text courtesy of the National Archives of Namibia, Windhoek. [Ref.
NAN.ZBU W 111, p. 2 (2053).]

Andanette Kararaimbe, Gerhartine Kukuri, Gerhartine Tjituka,
Natalia Kaheke, Andeline Kathea, and Sybil Bowker, MEETING OF
Herero Women
 Text courtesy of the National Archives of Namibia, Windhoek. [Ref
NAN.SWAA A50/119.]




540   ♦   Permissions Acknowledgments and Sources
Baboni Khama, Mmakgama Khama, Milly Khama, and Oratile
Sekgoma, LETTER TO THE HIGH COMMISSIONER
  Text courtesy of the Botswana National Archives and Records Service.
[Doc. DLS 17/23.]

Khami,Court Record
  Text courtesy of the National Archives of Zimbabwe, Harare. [Ref. No.
D3/19/5.]

Antjie Krog, The Birth of This Country’s Language
  Copyright © 1998, reprinted by permission of the publisher from: Krog,
Antjie. 1998. Country of My /^///.Johannesburg: Random House.

Ellen K. Kuzwayo, AFRICAN WISDOM
  Copyright ©    1998, reprinted by permission of the publisher from:
Kuzwayo, Ellen K. 199H. African Wisdom: A Personal Collection of Setswana
Proverbs. Cape Town: Kwela Books.

IKweiten ta //ken, WHATTHE MAIDENS Do WITH ROOI KLIP
  Text courtesy of the University of Cape Town Libraries, Bleek Collection
[No. 151; Lucy Lloyd Notebooks: 1874. Bushman Notebook, Vol. 6, No. 1:
3970-3974],

Keamogetswe Kwere and Lesie Kwere, We Will Be LEASING FOR
Ourselves
  Translation © 1997-1998, published by permission of Maitseo Bolaane.

Queen Regent Labotsibeni, ADDRESS TO THE RESIDENT
Commissioner
  Text from: National Archives of Swaziland, Mbabane. [“Installation of
Sobhuza,’ Ref. RCS 756/20, folios 64-65 (22 December 1921).]

Eliza M., Account of Cape Town
  Text courtesy of the National Library of South Africa, Cape Town. [“A
Kaffir Account of Cape Town,” King Williams Town Gazette and Kaffriar-
ian Banner September 10, 1863. 3.]

Sindiwe Magona,STELLA
  Copyright © 1991, reprinted by permission of the publisher from:
Magona, Sindiwe. 1991. Living, Loving and Lying Awake at Night. Cape
Town: David Philip and Northampton, Mass: Interlink Books..

Unangoroa Maherero, Louisa Kambazembi, Edla Maherero, Augusta
Kambazembi, Magdalina Katjimune, and Hester Keha, NATION           Is
Going to Ruination




                  Permissions Acknowledgments and Sources          ♦    541
  Text courtesy of the National Archives of Namibia, Windhoek. [Ref.
NAN: SWAA 1:49. 158/23/2.]

Thoko Remigia Makhanya, A NOBLE WOMAN OF AFRICA
  Copyright © 1993, reprinted by permission of the publisher from: Rule,
Peter, with Marilyn Aitken and Jenny van Dyk. 1993. Nokukhanya: Mother
of Light. Johannesburg: The Grail.

Nise Malange, I, THE UNEMPLOYED
  Copyright © 1986, reprinted by permission of Nise Malange from:
Sitas, Ari, ed. 1986. Black Mamba Rising: South African Worker Poets in the
Stuggle. Durban: COSATU.

Winnie Madikizela Mandela, DETENTION ALONE Is ATRIAL IN ITSELF
  Text from: William Cullen Library, University of the Witwatersrand.
[FEDSAW papers: A1985/F 2:4.]

Minnie Martin, MOLIEGE’S VENGEANCE
  Text courtesy of the National Library of South Africa, Cape Town. [The
South African Magazine (August 1906): 566-570.]

Cheche Maseko and Loice Mushore, WAR FROM WITHIN
  Copyright © 1990, reprinted by permission of Irene Staunton from:
Staunton, Irene, ed. 1990. Mothers of the Revolution. Harare: Baobab Books.

Sheila Masote, TESTIMONY: TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION
Commission
  Reprinted by permission of the author from: www.truth.org.za. Human
Rights Violation Hearings: Women’s Hearings, Case no. JB04279/01 GTSOW.

Dorothy Masuka,    Two   SONGS
  Copyright © 1956, reprinted by permission of the author from: Galo
Records. 1958-1959.

Charlotte Manye Maxeke, SOCIAL CONDITIONS AMONG BANTU
Women and Girls
  Text courtesy of the Africana Library, University of Fort Hare. [1930.
Christian   Students and Modern      South Africa: A Report of the Bantu-
Europeans’ Student Conference, Fort Hare, June 27th—July 3rd, 1930. Fort
Hare, Alice: Student Christian Association. 111-117.]

Cinikile Mazibuko and Makhosazane Nyadi,         Two   DREAM-MlRACLE
Stories
  Copyright © 1996, reprinted by permission of the publisher from:
Muller, Carol. 1996. “Nazarite Women, Religious Narrative and the
Construction of Cultural Truth and Power” in M. J. Daymond, ed. South
African Feminisms. New York and London: Garland.




542   ♦   Permissions Acknowledgments and Sources
Fatima Meer, MURMURS IN THE KUTUM
  Copyright © 1969, reprinted by permission of the author from: Meer,
Fatima. 1969. Portrait of Indian South Africans. Durban: Avon House.

“Thandiwe Mhlanga,” Angela Kotler, and Hazel Hall, ARRESTED
For Being Women
  Copyright © 1998, reprinted by permission of the publisher from:
Watson, Peggy. 1998. Determined to Act. Harare: Women’s Action Group.

Gcina Mhlophe, Praise to Our Mothers
   Copyright © 1993, reprinted by permission of the author from: Rule,
Peter with Marilyn Aitken and Jenny van Dyk. 1993. Nokukhanya: Mother
of Light. Johannesburg: The Grail.

MaMhlalise Mkhwanazi, The BASKING LIZARD
  Copyright © 1994, reprinted by permission of the publisher from:
Gunner, Liz and Malika Gwala, eds. 1994. Musho: Zulu Popular Praises.
East Lansing: Michigan State University Press.

“Segametsi Molefe,” “Banabotlhe Kwena,” and “Matshediso Moeng,”
Three Court Statements
  Text from: Botswana National Archives and Records Services. [Docs.
2DC MOL 2/22 and 2/23.]

Athaliah Molokomme, Leloba Molema, Opha Dube, Motsei Madisa,
Ruth Motsete, and Onalenna Selolwane, CITIZENSHIP: An OPEN
Letter to the Attorney-General
  Copyright © 1985, reprinted by permission of the publisher from: The
Botswana Guardian (Oct. 18, 1985) 1: 10.

Marion Morel (Marion Welsh), It’S GOTTA Be CASH FOR A COOKIE
 Copyright © 1959, reprinted by permission of the author from: Drum
(June 1959): 21.

Qedabakwabo Moyo, Going TO SCHOOL
  Text from: the Archives of the Brethren in Christ Church and Messiah
College, Grantham, Pennsylvania [“Qedabakwabo.” The Evangelical Visitor
(8 August 1921): 11-12].

Maria Munsaka, Nhamiwa’S MAGIC STICK
  Copyright © 1992, reprinted by permission of the publisher from:
Zimbabwe Women in Contemporary Culture. 1992. Zimbabwe Women in
Contemporary Culture Diary-Notebook. Harare: ZWCC.

Colette Mutangadura, NGONYA’s BRIDE-PRICE
  Copyright © 2002, published by permission of the author.




                   Permissions Acknowledgments and Sources      ♦   543
Louisa Mvemve, A “LITTLE WOMAN’S” ADVICE TO THE PUBLIC
  Text courtesy of the National Archives of South Africa, Pretoria. [Ref.
NTS 939 3/376 Part 1; 1915/1916.]

Helena Namases and Emma Narises, The Girl AgA-ABES
  Copyright © 1994, reprinted by permission of Sigrid Schmid from:
Schmid, Sigrid. 1994. Tsi Tsi Ge Ge Hahe. New Namibia Books.

Ellen Ndeshi Namhila, The PRICE OF FREEDOM
   Copyright © 1997, reprinted by permission of the publisher from: Namhila,
Ellen Ndeshi. 1997. The Price of Freedom. Windhoek: New Namibia Books.

Native and Coloured Women of the Province of the Orange Free State,
Petition of the Native and Coloured Women of the Province
of the Orange Free State
  Text courtesy of the National Archives of South Africa, Pretoria, Transvaal
Archives Depot, National Archives Repository. [Ref: GG 1542 50/284
(Formerly: GG 1163 50/384).]

Elizabeth Ncube, PRAISE TO MBUYA NeHANDA
   Copyright © 1993 by Elizabeth Ncube. Published by permission of the
estate of Elizabeth Ncube.

Lassie Ndondo, PAST AND PRESENT
  Copyright © 1963, reprinted by permission of the author from:
Ndondo, Lassie. 1962. Qaphela Ingane. Pietermaritzburg: Natal Witness.

Lauretta Ngcobo, The RENDING OF THE VEIL
  Copyright © 1981 by Lauretta Ngcobo, reprinted by permission of the
author and of Shelley Power Literary Agency from: Ngcobo, Lauretta.
Cross of Gold. London: Longman.

Lilian Ngoyi, PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS TO THE AFRICAN NATIONAL
Congress Women’s League, Transvaal
  Text from: William Cullen Library, University qf the Witwatersrand.
[Carter-Karis Microfilm of South African Political Materials, Reel 2B,
Ref. 2:DA15: 30/11, Department of Historical Papers.]

Kaatje Nieuwveldt, TESTIMONY
  Text from: National Archives of South Africa, Cape Town. [Item 1/UIT
14/37.]

Nosente of the Umgqwashe, THE STORY OF NOSENTE
  Copyright © 1936, reprinted by permission of the trustees of the will of
the late Dame Margery Perham from: Perham, Margery, ed. 1936. Ten
Africans. London: Faber and Faber.
                          *




544   ♦   Permissions Acknowledgments and Sources
Phyllis Ntantala, The WIDOWS OF THE RESERVES
  Copyright © 1958, reprinted by permission of the publisher from: Africa
South in Exile 2.3 (1958): 9-13.

Mpho ’M’atsepo Nthunya, BEFORE THE BEGINNING
  Copyright    ©   1996, reprinted   by permission     of the   author   from:
Nthunya, Mpho M’atsepo. 1996. Singing Away the Hunger: Stories of Life
in Lesotho. Pietermaritzburg: University of Natal Press.

Regina Ntongana, CROSSROADS
  Copyright © 1984, reprinted by permission of Beata Lipman from:
Lipman, Beata, ed.      1984.   We Make Freedom: Women in South Africa.
London: Pandora.

NyaMutango (Ntumba Machai), MuTONDO—NYEMBA INITIATION
Songs
  Copyright © 2002 by Ntumba Machai.

Karen Press, KROTOA’S STORY
  Copyright © 1990, reprinted by permission of the author from: Press,
Karen. 1990. Bird Heart Stoning the Sea. Cape Town: Buchu Books.

Ntebogang Ratshosa, SPEECH TO THE BANGWAKETSE
  Text courtesy of the Botswana National Archives and Records Service.
[Doc. S 601/20 and Doc. S. 5/5.]

Kristina Rungano, THE WOMAN
   Copyright   ©   1984,   reprinted by permission     of the   author from:
Rungano,    Kristina.   1984. A Storm    is Brewing.    Harare:   Zimbabwe
Publishing House.

Agnes Sam, Jesus Is Indian
   Copyright © 1989, reprinted by permission of the publisher from: Sam,
Agnes. Jesus Is Indian and Other Stories. London: Heinemann: 1994.

Olive Schreiner, LEAVING THE FARM
   Copyright © 2002 by the estate of Olive Schreiner. Text courtesy of the
Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center, the University of Texas at
Austin.

Gasethata Segaise, Mmatsheko Pilane, and Motshabi Molefhe, “LEND
Me a Dress”: Testimonies on Education
   Copyright © 1991, 1999, published by permission of Gasethata Segaise.

Oratile Sekgoma, INHERITANCE:        Two   LETTERS
  Text courtesy of the Botswana National Archives and Records Service.
[Doc. DCS 8/15 and Doc. S 48/5.]

Nehambo Magdalena Shamena, EMERGENCY CALL FROM THE


                    Permissions Acknowledgments and Sources              ♦   545
Women of Namibia
      Copyright © 1974. Text from: Kalahari Times 7.6 <3e 7 (June/July 1974): p. 11.

Nehambo Magdalena Shamena, KANDISHIWO—I Don’t KNOW
      Copyright © 1984, reprinted by permission of the publisher from:
Shamena, Magdalena. 1984. Wir Kinder Namibias. Eine Lebensgeschichte.
Erlangen: Verlag der Ev.-Luth. Mission Erlangen.

Nekwaya Loide Shikongo, SONG OF KING IlPUMBU
  Copyright © 1975, reprinted by permission of the Institut fur
Afrikanistik und Athiopistik, University of Hambur, from: Dammann,
Ernst and Toivo E. Tirronen, eds.             1975. Ndonga-Anthologie. Berlin:
Dietrich Reimer Verlag.

Cherry Stephana Mogolo Sibeko, AFRICAN WOMEN                   Do   NOT WANT
Passes
   Copyright © 1958, reprinted by permission of the estate of Mogolo
Sibeko. Text from William Cullen Library, University of the Witwaters-
rand [FEDSAW papers: Cb.1.6. file 2],

Joyce Sikhakhane, WORKING ON THE MAIL
 Copyright © 1977, reprinted by permission of the Robben Island
Museum, Robben Island, South Africa, from: Sikhakhane Joyce. 1977. A
Window on Soweto. London: International Defence and Aid Fund.

Joyce Simango, WOMEN ARE WEALTH
      Copyright © 1974, reprinted by permission of the author and the pub¬
lisher from: Simango, Joyce. 1974. Zviuya Zvim Mben. Harare: Longman
Zimbabwe.

Maureen Kim Sing, WHAT OF THE FUTURE?
  Copyright © 1965, reprinted by permission of the author from: Student
Spectrum 5.5 (Oct. 1965). Cape Town.

Nokwanda Sithole, A BROKEN FAMILY
                                                           A
   Copyright © 1991, reprinted by permission of the Ford Foundation
Study Group, New York, from: Lodge, Tom and Bill Nasson, eds. 1991.
All\ Here, and Now: Black Politics in South Africa in the 1980s. Cape Town:
The Ford Foundation and David Philip.

Mavis Smallberg, FOR WlLLY NYATHELE
  Copyright © 1988, reprinted by permission of the author from: 1988.
Buang Basadi—Khulumani Makhosikazi—Women                   Speak: Conference on
Women and Writing. Johannesburg: COSAW, Transvaal Region.

Katrina Stephanus, Sofia Labau, Magdalena Vries, Katrina Skeier,
Emmillie Adams, Sofia F[loete, Katrina de Klerk, and Lissie Kisting,
Letter from Keetmanshoop


546    ♦   Permissions Acknowledgments and Sources
 Text courtesy of the National Archives of Namibia, Windhoek. [Ref.
NAN SWAA A50/119.]

Victoria Nombulelo M. Swaartbooi, UMANDISA
   Copyright © 1957, reprinted by permission of the publisher from:
Swaartbooi, Victoria Nombulelo M. 1957. UMandisa. Alice: Lovedale Press.

Gladys Thomas, Fall Tomorrow
   Copyright ©    1972, reprinted by permission of the author from:
Matthews, James and Gladys Thomas. 1972. Cry Rage! Johannesburg:
Spro-Cas.

Miriam Tlali, THE HAUNTING MELANCHOLY OF KLIPVOORDAM
   Copyright © 1981, reprinted by permission of the author from: Staffrider
4.1 (April/May 1981): 13-16.

//Ukxa Nla’an, The Old People Give You Life
   Text from: Biesele, Megan. 1972. Recording. Dobe, Botswana.

!Unn/obe Morethlwa, TOBACCO, SUGAR, ALCOHOL, AND COFFEE:
These Things Have Turned Us into Slaves
  Text from: Biesele Megan and Thomas Dowson. 1991. Videotape.
Courtesy of Witwatersrand University Film Unit, Johannesburg.

Yvonne Vera, WRITING NEAR THE BONE
  Copyright © 1997, reprinted by permission of the author from: Neue
Zilrcher Zeitung, 1997.

Zoe Wicomb, ANOTHER STORY
  Copyright © 1990, reprinted by Permission of the publisher from:
Lefanu, Sarah and Stephen Hayward, eds. 1990. Colours of a New Day:
Writing for South Africa. Johannesburg: Ravan Press.

Doris M. Wisdom (Lessing), THE CASE OF THE FOOLISH MINISTER
  Copyright © 1943, reprinted by permission of the author from: Rafters
(Nov. 1943). Salisbury, Rhodesia.

Nongenile Masithathu Zenani, A Man Hides Food FROM HlS
Family
  Copyright © 1992, reprinted by permission of the publisher from:
 Scheub, Harold, ed. 1992. The World and the Word: Tales and Observations
from the Xhosa Oral Tradition. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.




                   Permissions Acknowledgments and Sources          ♦   547
\




    A
Authors Listed by Country

Botswana

Communal, Unity Dow, Opha Dube, Bessie Head, Baboni Khama, Milly
Khama, Mmakgama Khama, “Banabotlhe Kwena,” Keamogetswe Kwere,
Lesie Kwere, Motsei Madisa, “Matshediso Moeng,” “Segametsi Molefe,”
Motshabi Molefhe, Leloba Molema, Athaliah Molokomme, Ruth Motsete,
Mmatsheko     Pilane,   Ntebogang    Ratshosa,    Gasethata   Segaise,    Oratile
Sekgoma, Onalenna Selolwane, //Ukxa Nla’an, !Unn/obe Morethlwa



Lesotho

Anonymous, Adele Mabille, Mpho ’M’atsepo Nthunya



Namibia

Emmillie Adams, Anonymous, Beh N!a’an, Sybil Bowker, Katrina de Klerk,
Di//xao   =Oma, Natalie    Kaheke, Mekulu Mukwahongo Ester Kamati,
Augusta Kambazembi, Louisa Kambazembi, Kandjende’s Sister, Andanette
Kararaimbe,   Andeline    Kathea,    Magdalina     Katjimune,   Kambauruma
Kazahendike, Urieta (Johanna Maria) Kazahendike, Hester Keha, Lissie
Listing, Sofia Kloete, Gerhartine Kukuri, Sofia Labau, Edla Maherero,
Unangoroa Maherero, Helena Namases, Ellen Ndeshi Namhila, Emma
Narises, NyaMutango (Ntumba Machai), Nehambo Magdalena Shamena,
Nekwaya Loide Shikongo, Katrina Skeier, Katrina Stephanus, Gerhartine
Tjituka, Sara van Wijk, Margarethe von Eckenbrecher, Magdalena Vries



South Africa

Anonymous, Susiwe Bengu, Hilda Bernstein (Tandi), Lily Changfoot,
Yvette Christianse, Communal, Jennifer Davids, Ingrid de Kok, Paulina
Dlamini, Adelaide Charles Dube, Federation of South African Women,
Eliza Feilden, Nadine Gordimer, Joan Hambidge, Hamsi (Marie Kathleen
Jeffreys), Indian Women’s Association, Tryn Isaac, Florence Nolwandle
Jabavu, Noni Jabavu, Ingrid Jonker, Princess Magogo kaDinuzulu, Antjie
Krog, Ellen K. Kuzwayo, IKweiten ta //ken, Eliza M., Sindiwe Magona,
Thoko Remigia Makhanya, Nise Malange, Winnie Madikizela Mandela,
Minnie    Martin,   Sheila Masote,    Charlotte    Manye   Maxeke,       Cinikile
Mazibuko, Fatima Meer, Nontsizi Mgqwetho, Gcina Mhlophe, MaMhlalise
Mkhwanazi, Marion Morel (Marion Welsh), Louisa Mvemve, Native and
Coloured Women of the Province of the Orange Free State, Lauretta
Ngcobo, Lilian Ngoyi, Kaatje Nieuwveldt, Nosente of the Umgqwashe,
Phyllis Ntantala, Regina Ntongana, Makhosazane Nyadi, Karen Press,
Agnes Sam, Emma Sandile, Olive Schreiner, Cherry Stephana Mogolo
Sibeko, Joyce Sikhakhane, Maureen Kim Sing, Nokwanda Sithole, Mavis
Smallberg, Victoria Nombulelo M. Swaartbooi, Gladys Thomas, Miriam
Tlali, Noneko (Hannah) Toney, Lydia Umkasetemba , A. M. van den Berg,
Zoe Wicomb, Nongenile Masithathu Zenani



Swaziland

Communal, Queen Regent Labotsibeni



Zimbabwe

Jane       Chifamba, Tsitsi   Dangarembga,     Elizabeth     Dube,   Hazel   Hall,
Marevasei       Kachere, Khami, Angela Kotler, Cheche Maseko, Dorothy
Masuka, “Thandiwe Mhlanga,” Qedabakwabo Moyo, Maria Munsaka,
Loice Mushore, Colette Mutangadura, Elizabeth Ncube, Lassie Ndondo,
Kristina      Rungano, Joyce       Simango, Yvonne   Vera,   Doris   M. Wisdom
(Lessing)




                               *




550    ♦    Authors Listed by Country
Index
Account of Cape     Bengu, Susiwe, 134       de Kok, Ingrid, 397    Going to School,
 Town, 98           Bernstein, Hilda         Detention Alone         173
Adams, Emmillie,      (Tandi), 263            Is aTrial in          Good as Dead,
  219               Birth of This             Itself, 344            515
Address to the       Country’s               Diary of a             Gordimer, Nadine,
 Resident            Language, The,           Detainee, 263          467
 Commissioner,       500                     Di//xao =Oma, 398
 171                Bojale—Setswana          Dlamini, Paulina,      Hall, Hazel, 375
Affidavit, 109       Initiation                212                  Hambidge, Joan,
Africa: My Native    Songs, 506
                                             Dow, Unity, 520          415
 Land,161           Bowker, Sybil, 221
                                             Dube, Adelaide         Hamsi (Marie
African Wisdom,     Broken Family, A,          Charles, 161           Kathleen Jeffreys),
 491                 448                                              229
                                             Dube, Elizabeth, 515
African Women       BusJourneyto                                    Haunting
                                             Dube, Opha, 386
 Do Not Want         Tsolo, 271                                      Melancholy of
 Passes, 246                                                         Klipvoordam,
                                             Emergency Call
Anonymous, 85,      Caring for the                                   The, 363
                                              from the
  105, 115, 120,     Dying, 520                                     Head, Bessie, 290
                                              Women of
  254,308
                    Case of the               Namibia, 337
Another Story,       Foolish                                        I Am a Wailing
 419                 Minister, The,                                    Fool, 308
                                             Fall Tomorrow,
April 27: The        225                                            I Drift in the
                                              333
 First Time, 467    Changfoot, Lily, 372                              Wind, 306
                                             Federation of South
Arrested for        Chifamba, Jane, 285                             Indian Women’s
                                               African Women,
 Being Women,                                                         Association, 155
                    Children of                236
 375                 Namibia, 411
                                             Feilden, Eliza, 128    Inheritance: Two
Aunt, Stretch                                                         Letters, 182
                    Christianse, Yvette,     Flight of the
 out the              522                      Royal                Intonjane—Xh o s a
 Blanket, 254
                    Citizenship: An            Household, 212         Initiation
                      Open Letter to                                  Songs, 507
                                             For “Napoleon
Ballad of            the Attorney-                                  Isaac, Tryn, 109
                                              Bonaparte,”
 Nomagundwane,        General, 386            Jenny, and            I, THE
 287                Communal, 461,            Kate, 290                Unemployed,
Bantu Home Life,      463, 506,507,513       For Willy                 390
 189                Crossroads, 377           Nyathele, 400         It’s Gotta Be
Basking Lizard,     Court Record,                                      Cash for a
 The, 346            152                     Generations, 522          Cookie, 252
Baster Affidavit,
                                             Giraffe Song, 442      Izisho
 165
                    Dangarembga,             Girl Aga-abes,           ZOKU SEBENZA—
Before the            Tsitsi, 392             The, 259                Work Songs,
 Beginning, 470
                    Davids, Jennifer, 343    God’s Peace and          463
Beh N!a’an, 442
                    de Klerk, Katrina, 219    Blessing, 96
Jabavu, Florence       Kotler, Angela, 375      Mabille, Adele, 131    Morel, Marion
  Nolwandle, 189       Krog, Antjie, 500        Madisa, Motsei, 386      (Marion Welsh),
Jabavu, Noni, 271                                                        252
                       Krotoa’s Story,          Magona, Sindiwe,
Jeffreys, Marie          433                      438                  Mother Praises

  Kathleen. See                                                          Her Baby, A,
                       Kukuri, Gerhartine,      Maherero, Edla, 209
  Hamsi                                                                  105
                         221                    Maherero,
Jesus Is Indian,                                                       Motsete, Ruth, 386
                       Kuzwayo, Ellen K.,         Unangoroa, 209
  402                    491                                           Moyo,
                                                Makhanya, Thoko
Jonker, Ingrid, 306                                                      Qedabakwabo,
                       IKweiten ta //ken, 111     Remigia, 457
                                                                         173
Journal of the         “Kwena,                  Malange, Nise, 390
  War, 139                                                             Munsaka, Maria,
                         Banabotlhe,” 283       Man Hides Food
                                                                         444
                       Kwere,                     from    His
                                                                       Murmurs in the
Kachere, Marevasei,      Keamogetswe, 484         Family, A, 316
                                                                         Kutum,309
  494                  Kwere, Lesie, 484        Mandela, Winnie
                                                                       Mushore, Loice, 430
kaDinuzulu,                                       Madikizela, 344
  Princess Magogo,                                                     Mutangadura,
                       Labau, Sofia, 219        Martin, Minnie, 144
  287                                                                    Colette, 476
                       Labotsibeni, Queen       Maseko, Cheche,
Kaheke, Natalie, 221                                                   Mutondo—
                         Regent, 171              430
                                                                         Nyemba
Kamati, Mekulu                                  Masote, Sheila, 479
                       Leaving the                                       Initiation
  Mukwahongo
                         Farm, 125              Masuka, Dorothy,         Songs, 510
  Ester, 411
                       “Lend Me a                 245                  Mvemve, Louisa, 162
Kambazembi,
                         Dress”:                Maxeke, Charlotte
  Augusta, 209
                         Testimonies on           Manye, 195
Kambazembi,              Education, 446                                Namases, Helena,
                                                Mazibuko, Cinikile,
  Louisa, 209                                                            259
                       Lessing, Doris. See        453
Kandishiwo—I             Wisdom, Doris          Meer, Fatima, 309      Namhila, Ellen
  Don’t Know,            M.                                              Ndeshi, 471
                                                Meeting of
  380
                       Letter, The, 392           Herero               Narises, Emma, 259
Kandjende’s Sister,
                       Letter from                Women, 221           Nation Is Going
  157
                         Karibib, 157           Mgqwetho,                to Ruination,
Kararaimbe,                                                              209
                       Letter from                Nontsizi, 176
  Andanette, 221
                         Keetmanshoop,          “Mhlanga,              Native and Coloured
Kathea, Andeline,        219                      Thandiwe,” 375         Women of the
  221                                                                    Province of the
                       Letter to Miss           Mhlophe, Gcina,
Katjimune,               Mackenzie, 113                                  Orange Free
                                                  413             A
  Magdalina, 209                                                         State, 158
                       Letter to the            Mkhwanazi,
Kazahendike,             High                                          Ncube, Elizabeth, 455
                                                  MaMhlalise, 346
  Kambauruma, 124        Commissioner,
                                                “Moeng,                Ndondo, Lassie, 268
Kazahendike, Urieta      180
                                                  Matshediso,” 283     Ngcobo, Lauretta,
  (Johanna Maria),     Letters and Land                                  357
  96                                            “Molefe, Segametsi,”
                         Submission, 91
                                                  283                  Ngonya’s Bride-
Keha, Hester, 209      Listen,                                           Price, 476
                                                Molefhe,Motshabi,
Khama, Baboni, 180       Compatriots!,
                                                  446                  Ngoyi, Lilian, 240
Khama, Milly, 180        176
                                                Molema, Leloba,        Nhamiwa’s Magic
Khama, Mmakgama,       “Little Woman’s”
                                                  386                    Stick,444
  180                    Advice to the
                                                Moliege’s              Nieuwveldt, Kaatje,
                         Public, A, 162
Khami, 152                                                               86
                                                  Vengeance, 144
Kisting, Lissie, 219                                                   Noble Woman of
                                                Molokomme,
                       M., Eliza, 98
Kloete, Sofia, 219                                Athaliah, 386          Africa, A, 457


552     ♦   Index
Nosente of the         Congress             Social                 Toney, Noneko
  Umgqwashe, 200       Women’s                Conditions             (Hannah), 113
Ntantala, Phyllis,     League,                Among Bantu          Two Dream-
  248                  Transvaal, 240         Women and              Miracle
Nthunya, Mpho        Press, Karen, 433        Girls, 195             Stories, 453
  ’M’atsepo, 470     Price of               Song of the            Two Lions Who
Ntongana, Regina,      Freedom, The,          Afflicted, 85          Changed
  377                  471                  Song of King             Themselves

Nyadi,                                        Iipumbu, 231           into People

  Makhosazane, 453                          Speech to the            and Married
                     Ratshosa,
                       Ntebogang, 187         Bangwaketse,           Two Herero
NyaMutango
                                              187                    Girls, 124
  (Ntumba Machai),   Rending of the
  510                  Veil, The, 357       Stella,438             Two Songs, 245

                     Return Journey,        Stephanus, Katrina,
                       372                    219                  //Ukxa Nla’an, 335
Old People Give
  You Life, The,     Rungano, Kristina,     Story of               Umandisa, 205
  335                  385                    Ngangezwe and        Umkasetemba,
                                              Mnyamana,              Lydia, 106
Ominous
                                              The, 115
  Weather, 147       Sam, Agnes, 402                               Unanana-bosele,
                                            Story of Nosente,        106
Our Government       Sandile, Emma, 91
                                              The, 200
  Is a Glowing                                                     !Unn/obe
                     Schreiner, Olive,
  Ember, 398                                Swaartbooi, Victoria     Morethlwa, 315
                       125
                                              Nombulelo M., 205
Our Sharpeville,
                     Segaise, Gasethata,
  397                                       Swazi Wedding
                       446                                         van den Berg, A.
                                              Songs, 461
                                                                     M., 139
                     Sekgoma, Ora tile,
Past and Present,      180, 182                                    van Wijk, Sara, 165
  268                                       Testimony, 86
                     Selolwane,                                    Vera, Yvonne, 488
Penelopa                                    Testimony of a
                       Onalenna, 386                               von Eckenbrecher,
  Lienguane, 131                              School Girl, 134
                     Setswana                                        Margarethe, 147
Petition of the                             Testimony: Truth
                       Wedding                                     Vries, Magdalena,
  Native and                                  and
                       Songs, 513                                    219
  Coloured                                    Reconciliation
                     Shamena, Nehambo
  Women of the                                Commission, 479
                       Magdalena, 337,                             War from
  Province of                               Thomas, Gladys, 333
                       380                                           Within, 430
  the Orange                                Though  I Am
                     Shikongo, Nekwaya                             War in Zululand,
  Free State, 158                             Black, I Am
                       Loide, 231                                    The, 120
Pilane, Mmatsheko,                            Comely, 229
                     Sibeko, Cherry                                War Memoir, 494
  446                                       Three Court
                       Stephana Mogolo,
                                              Statements, 283      We Will Be
Poem for My
                       246
                                                                     Leasing for
  Mother, 343                               Tjituka, Gerhartine,
                     Sikhakhane, Joyce,                              Ourselves, 484
Portrait of                                   221
                       348
                                                                   Welsh, Marion. See
  Louisa, 128                               Tlali, Miriam, 363
                     Simango, Joyce, 339                             Morel, Marion
Praise to Mbuya
                     Sing, Maureen Kim,
                                            T.M.T. S?
                                                                   What of the
  Nehanda, 455                                T.B.M.G.,    415
                       303                                           Future?, 303
Praise to Our                               Tobacco, Sugar,
                     Sithole, Nokwanda,                            What the
  Mothers, 413                                Alcohol, and
                       448                                           Maidens Do
Presidential                                  Coffee: These
                     Skeier, Katrina, 219                            with Root Klip,
  Address to the                              Things Have
                     Smallberg, Mavis,                               111
  African                                     Turned Us into
                       400                                         Wicomb, Zoe,
  National                                    Slaves, 315
                                                                     419

                                                                     Index      ♦     553
Widow and the
  Baboons, The,
  285
Widows of the
  Reserves, The,
  248
Wisdom, Doris
  M.,   225
Woman, The, 385

Women Are
  Wealth, 339

Women’s
  Charter, 236

Women’s
  Petition:
  Domestic
  Unhappiness,
  155
Working on the
  Mail, 348

Writing near the
  Bone, 488



Zenani, Nongenile
  Masithathu, 316




554     ♦   Index
Cover Art: Celebration. Copyright © 1989 by Gertrude Fester. By permis¬
sion of the artist.
  This painting was created by Gertrude Fester in 1989 while she was
under arrest in Cape Town’s Pollsmoore prison. Charged with treason for
her membership in the African National Congress and her anti-apartheid
activism, she endured solitary confinement and there began to compose
poetry as a “survival mechanism.” Later she was allowed painting materi¬
als, and Celebration was her first work.
  Also active in the struggle for women’s emancipation, Fester helped to
found   several grassroots women’s    organizations, including the black
women’s writing group WEAVE (Women’s Educational and Artistic Voice
and Expressions). She was a member of South Africa’s first democratic
national parliament and is currently serves on that country’s Commission
on Gender Equality.
\
    A
DATE DUE
 TR NT UN V RSITY




Oil 64 0552835 1
The Women Writing Africa Project
          Volume 1

                         WOMEN

         uv              WRITING
                         AFRICA




        THE FEMINIST PRESS
         at the City University of New York




                 Printed in Canada
