Sultan Fatima binti Muhammad Mkubwa 
PEACE AND SECURITY
Tanzania 1711 Kiswahili

In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate,
I, the ruler of Kilwa, Sultan Fatima, daughter of Sultan and former ruler Muhammad Mkubwa, dictate this letter to our friend Mwinyi Jumaa, son of the late Sayyid Mwinyi Kaje:
My greetings. This letter is to inform you that I have seen the governor of the Imam and the emissaries of the Imam, Sheikh All ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn Mtibarak al-Eukhayt. They told me that we should be given a letter from our Lord the Imam saying that we should write to all of our subjects who are in the Kerimba region and tell them that they should come to Kilwa where God's peace prevails.
Anyone who wants to should come, and if she or he come with their posses¬sions, no one will rob them. Those who want to sell Islamic foods should come. There is nothing to worry about. If a person intends to come to his or her home, he or she should come. There is peace, and no one will seize that person's property. Tell this to all the people who are there, except the Europeans. They are the enemies of the Imam. Anyone who is a Swahili person will not be ill-treated by an Arab.
The end, in peace.



Mwana Kupona binti Msbam
FROM A MOTHER'S ADVICE AND PRAYER: AN EPIC POEM
Kenya 1858 Kiswahili

1.	Come near, my dear daughter, You, a young inexperienced woman, Listen to my advice
That I hope you will remember.
2.	I have been ill
The entire past year,
So ill that I could not speak Even a word of advice to you.
3.	Come to me and hear me, Come with paper and ink, For I have a story
That I want to tell you.
4.	Now that you are near me,
Say Bismillahi, In the Name of God. Pray for the Holy Prophet
And also his companions.
5.	After you pronounce the name Of God Almighty,
We will pray for a future
That God may grant us.
6.	The human being is nothing And the world is not ours, For certainly, there is no one Who will ever be immortal.
7.	Take my advice, my child, And my blessings also,
For God will protect you And keep you from evil.
8.	Take this charm that I give to you, Tie it securely with a cord, Honor and treasure it. May you care for it always.
9.	I will string for you a precious amulet Of pearls and coral beads
To adorn you elegantly.
May it glow upon your neck.
10.	1 would like to give you a pendant, One precious, perfect, without fault, To wear around your neck.
You shall see its benefits.
11.	If you remember my advice, My child, you will never suffer. You will walk across this world, And later you will enter paradise.
12.	First, remain loyal to your religion: Fulfill the Faradhi that is required, Follow the Sunna that is advised. This is your obligation.
13.	Second, be virtuous: Have a sweet tongue
That you may be respected Wherever you may go.
14.	Be trustworthy.
Hold firm to your beliefs. Avoid those who are unjust; Shun their company.
15.	My daughter, take special care When you meet the powerful: Wherever you may meet them, Quickly show them respect.
16.	As they approach,
Rise to meet them cheerfully, And when they depart,
Escort them as they leave.
17.	Be amusing when you speak, Without being malicious. Do not argue needlessly, Lest people despise you.
18.	Speak jokingly with people; Use pleasant and joyous words. Better to be quiet
Than to use words that spite.
19.	Avoid those matters You do not understand; Even aimless talk and grumbling—Avoid these, I beg of you.
20.	Stay away from the slaves
Except when doing chores,
For they may harm your reputation. Perhaps I have said this before.
21.	Avoid the company of the ignorant, Who do not behave properly,
Showing no generosity toward others. Keep away; do not approach them.
22.	Darling, listen to what I'm saying: A woman requires five approvals If she is to rest
In paradise and on earth.
23.	These are of God and the Prophet, And of one's father and mother.
The fifth is of one's husband,
As you have heard many times.
24.	You should have your husband's approval As long as you are together,
So that when you are separated,
His approval will have been given.
25.	Should you die before him, His approval should be with you. You will carry it with you.
It will show you the way.
26.	On the day of resurrection, Your husband's wish will be granted. He will be asked what he wills, And all will be as he wishes.
27.	If he wills paradise for you, Certainly, you will enter.
If he wills that you perish in hell, Certainly, there you shall go.
28.	Live with him courteously. Do not drive him to anger.
Should he be angry, do not respond; Make every effort to remain silent.
29.	Be in harmony with him; Deny him not what he desires. Do not quarrel with him;
If you do, you will be the loser.
30.	If he leaves, bid him farewell.
When he returns, welcome and honor him, Then prepare a comfortable place
Where he may rest.
31.	When he sleeps, do not stir about, But lean towards him, and stroke him. He should not lack
The enjoyment of a cool breeze.
32.	If he dozes while leaning on you, Move not, nor raise your voice. Sit still, stir not,
Lest he be startled awake.
33.	When he awakens, care for him. Offer him a fine meal. Also care for his body: Massage him and wash him.
34.	Shave him, caress him, Trim his beard,
Burn incense around him From morning until evening.
35.	Care for him as though He were a very young child, Who could not yet speak;
Anticipate his needs and desires.
36.	Amuse him until he's entranced. Do not reject his command.
If he behaves disgracefully,
Surely God will take revenge for you.
37.	My child, do not be slovenly. Act as you see best,
But never ignore, not even once, Matters of cleanliness.
38.	Bathe often and carefully.
Braid your hair,
Adorning it with jasmine blossoms; Also put them on your bedclothes.
39.	Dress yourself beautifully As though you were still a bride. Wear ankle bracelets
And bangles on your wrists.
40.	Hang amulets and pendants Always around your neck.
Smooth your body with fragrance Of perfumes and sweet oils.
41.	Wear rings on your fingers And henna on your palms. Put kohl around your eyes And also on your eyebrows.
42.	Keep your house neat To lift your husband's status, And when company enters, Praise him to them.
43.	Whatever he desires,
Follow that same desire.
What he disapproves,
Be not the person who brings it to him.
44.	If you must go out,
Seek his permission.
If he does not give it,
Stay at home; do not argue with him.
45.	Follow his guidance To ensure his approval.
Do not stay outside,
Especially after ten at night.
46.	Do not engage in idle chatter. Do not unveil yourself.
Cast your eyes down in humility. Your expression should be shy.
47.	Quickly return to your home To keep your husband company. Prepare a place of comfort
Where both of you may sleep.
48.	Praise your husband.
Make his reputation known.
You should not compel him
To undertake what he is not able to do.
49.	Receive whatever he gives you With joy in your heart.
What he does not willingly do, It is not for you to tell him.
50.	When you encounter his face, Smile and laugh.
Do what he tells you
Unless it is against God.
51.	My darling, do not be quick to speak. Ask me, your mother.
I was married for ten years;
Not once did we disagree
52.	Your father married me
In joy and in bliss.
We never embarrassed each other All the days we were together.
65.	Listen to my words, beloved daughter; I beseech you not to ignore them.
You surely will see their benefits
In heaven and here on earth.
66.	That is the end of my words Of advice to you, my daughter. Now I will pray to God
To grant my prayer.
67.	However much we talk, Human beings are worthless. God is the one who is able To destroy and to save.
68.	I pray to You, Almighty, To aid me
In what I say
And in what I have not said.
69.	All that I have said, God, accept from me;
And I pray to you again, Dear God, provide for me.
70.	Look after my children
And my younger brother.
May their names become renowned And known in other places.
71.	God, take care of my family,
And the children of my family members. May they extend throughout the world In goodness and prosperity.
72. Those of the Islamic faith,
God, please bless them. Fulfill their desires
And make them happy.



Emily Ruete, also known as Princess Salma of Zanzibar
A ROYAL CHILDHOOD IN ZANZIBAR
Tanzania 1886 German

As long as the child does not have enough strength to wear sandals (the wooden ones for girls and women are called hubkab, the leather ones for boys and`men are tailed watje), it runs' about barefooted. Because the watje are con¬siderably lighter to wear than the kubkab, very, small girls initially are made to walk on the former until they have acquired the necessary skill to wear the ku*bkeib forever. Neither children nor adults of both sexes wear stockings; only more aristocratic ladies use them now and then when riding, as custom requires one to cover the ankles.
Already at the age of two to four months, two or three slaves, besides the wet nurses, were allotted to the child by our father. From then on they remained its property. The older it grew, the more slaves it received for its personal atten¬dance. If one of them died, our father replaced him, or gave an appropriate sum of money. Up to 'a certain age, little girls wear boys' caps in the house.
Until his seventh year each prince at home stays among the women. At this age the mosaic rite [circumcision] is performed on him. Ceremonies of course play an important role on this occasion, the closing of which, after the child's recovery, forms a peculiar festivity, in which all dignitaries and high officials are allowed to take part. This deed, if in any way possible, was enacted in the coun¬try and in the presence of our father. A public entertainment, usually lasting for three days, also accompanied this.
 
From this time onwards, every boy received a quiet mare of his own. His escort could take their mounts from the stables, where a couple of hundred Arabian horses were standing. In this way the boy, at a very early age, learns to ride well and acquires a very outstanding skill and nimbleness, which only a trained circus rider is otherwise credited with. Since we had neither a true sad¬dle nor stirrup, it required of course much more dexterity to gain a firm seat than in this country. Our father followed a characteristic custom when his sons ran into some mishap while out riding. In that case not only they themselves but also their escort could expect punishment. For our father assumed that the latter, with the tight warrants and instructions which he had conferred on them, must have behaved much too indulgently towards the princes.
Not one of us was spoiled in any way. My father's high sense of justice and unparalleled generosity was combined with an equally firm consistency which did not know any weakness. All of us had to obey our teachers and educators on the strength of their word [be they Arabs, Abyssinians or simple negroes). If occasionally we complained to our father, we certainly left his presence in tears or shame for our behavior. This severity taught us the reverence due to such people, and with increasing age the appreciation of how deep our moral indebt¬edness to them was also grew.
The nurses, even if they had served as such for a very short time, were partic-ularly honoured and enjoyed special esteem for the remainder of their life. By birth they were always slaves, but as a rule they were freed in reward of their fidelity and devotion. The black wet nurses especially distinguished themselves by extraordinary fidelity and attachment. Even the most cautious mother might in all confidence leave her child with the wet nurse, who usually considered her¬self as its second mother and acted accordingly. How the lack of interest and the heartlessness of the wet nurses in these parts stand out in stark contrast with this! Often enough have I felt myself forced to give, on a public walkway, a good talking to such a character, totally unknown to me, for her brutal treatment of the little thing entrusted to her. This contrast between the wet nurses of these parts and our Arab ones may possibly be explained by the fact that the former are forced by their poverty alone to entrust their own beloved child to complete strangers under much sacrifice. Only for money's sake they serve masters; whether the child to nurse is called Tom or Dick is indifferent to them; their thoughts and feelings naturally linger with their own child. And which mother would hold this against her!
How very different is a black nurse's attitude towards her mistress's child entrusted to her. For years she is in the latter's service, she may even have been born in her house; it then is understandable that she does not have many private interests, that she makes those of her masters her own. Moreover, there is the most important fact that a black wet nurse only very rarely, if ever, is required to part with her child, but may quietly retain it. The wet nurse's child then receives the same nourishment as its little master or mistress, the same milk soup, part of the same fowl, etc.; the same goes for the bath, and the used dresses fall no
 
less to its lot. When its mother stops serving as a wet nurse, her child continues to be the playmate of her second foster-child. Though remaining a slave, it is always preferred to the rest of the slaves, and only bad people offend against this attachment to the foster-brother.
The black wet nurses, however, have one very bad habit. They know how to tell the little children of three to five years old very dreadful stories and fairy¬tales. Partly to amuse them, partly also to keep them quiet. The lion (simba), the leopard (tshui), the elephant (tembo), and the numerous witches (watchawi) occupy of course the first place in these often also for adults horrifying fables.
On the whole, rearing a child in the south is unquestionably much easier than here in the north: above all, the everlasting colds and everything they, usu¬ally entail are rare. Notwithstanding all indolence, children there are very inde¬pendent and adroit, for they are allowed to play and jump freer and more unconstrained (both in space and in dress) to their heart's content. Though gymnastic exercises are completely unknown, it is no rarity that a boy of ten to twelve in playing takes a stiff run and leaps over one or even two horses. High jumping in general plays an important role, and everybody strives as much as he can to surpass the other.
Swimming in the sea was practiced no less eagerly, and everybody taught himself without any guidance. Shooting too began early and was pursued with great passion. Mock-fights were extraordinarily favored from youth onward many an hour was devoted to them. Though the boys went about armed to the teeth and carried as much powder and lead as grown-ups, one hardly ever heard of an accident caused by imprudence.
Up to a certain age only, the young princes, as already mentioned above, lived in their father's house. Then a house of their own was assigned to each to keep independently, as a rule with their mother if she was still alive. As maintenance he was granted by our father a certain monthly allowance, and then he had to "cut his coat according to his cloth," which was certainly matching the needs. At marriage, at an increase to the family, or also for exceptional conduct, he might count on an extra allowance, but in no other case. Only when our father's ships arrived annually with the new purchases, did all my brothers and sisters living outside the paternal house come with their families to receive each the share belonging to him, whether he needed it or not. If any one of them had the great misfortune of spending more than what his allowance brought in, it was never made easy for him to pay his debts; nothing was more hateful to our father, and the one who had brought this disgrace to himself was very much on his guard not to incur the same a second time.
If a war broke out, as unfortunately was so often the case in Oman, all the princes, the half-grown included, had to take the field too and to take part in the fight like any common man. On the whole, discipline was strict, but it only raised the respect and reverence of the sons for their father. As a child I often saw with astonishment how my elder brother, anticipating the slaves, hurried to put, in readiness the sandals my father had left at the door of his room. The
 
elder brothers appeared also in the paternal house several times a day, as soon as our father was present, and then took part in the meals.
There is but very little to say about the education of a princess; the first years it is the same as that of her brothers, with the exception that the latter at their seventh year obtain a much greater freedom outside the house. The only thing deserving mention at a princess's birth is that, in accordance with the hairdress in our country, a broad comb, generally of silver, is placed under the back of the newborn to give it a flat shape for later age. When a Princess is married to one of her cousins, who to be sure are more numerous in Oman than in Zanzibar, she of course leaves the paternal house in exchange for that of her husband. The former, however, the sole and real bulwark against all hardships of life, remains always open as a place to live. But if she prefers, she can also go and live with a brother. Every sister has her favourite brother, and vice versa; in joy and sorrow these two stick together and support each other by word and deed. As praise¬worthy and, for those concerned, as much a blessing as this habit was in such a numerous family circle as ours, it understandably created many jealousies among brothers and sisters, and it often required a strong character to overcome all these.
Often such a loving sister had to intercede with our father for some impru¬dence of her favourite brother, for he liked to favour his daughters and rarely left their requests unheard. To his elder daughters in particular he was extraor¬dinarily obliging; he usually went to meet them from afar and had them seated by his side on the sofa, while the grown-up sons and we little people stood respectfully before him.
Schooling (mdarse) is of very little importance for the Oriental in general and consequently for us too. In Europe school is at the center of State and Church, without distinction for prince and citizen; for both the formation of his character and his prospects for the future, the individual depends essentially upon it for his success. But in the Orient the mdarse is altogether a matter of secondary importance; for a good many people it does not exist at all. But before engaging in further discussions, I wish to say something about what we called school in our house.
At the age of six to seven, all my brothers and sisters, boys as well as girls, had,to enter the mdarse. We girls were only required to learn to read, the boys to read and write. For teaching there was at both Bet il•Mtoni and Bet it Sahel only one lady teacher, whom our father had sent for from Oman. When the teacher fell ill and was confined to her bed, there was always great joy among us; no replacement could be procured for her, and so we had holidays.
There was no specific schoolroom, lessons took place in an open gallery, to which pigeons, parrots, peacocks and ricebirds found free entrance. From there we also had a free view of the courtyard and were able to amuse ourselves with watching its busy life down there. The furniture of the schoolroom consisted of a single, immense mat only. Our school equipment was equally simple: we only needed a Kuran with its stand (marfa), a small inkstand with ink, a bamboo
 
quill, and a well-bleached shoulder-blade of a camel. The latter is the substitute for the slate; writing with ink on this is quite easy, and the nerves are certainly less assailed than at the scratching on the slate. Our slaves usually took care of wiping off the blades.
The first thing we had to learn, exactly as is done here, was the very compli¬cated Arabic alphabet. Then, for want of any other school-book, we started reading the Kuran with which, as mentioned above, writing lessons were con¬nected for the boys. When one was able to read a little, one joined the others who all read in a chorus and mostly very loudly. But that was all, for what is read and learned is never explained. Hence there was at most only one among thousands who understood word by word all the meanings and precepts of the Holy Script of the Muslims and who was able to explain them, though probably, eighty out of one hundred had learned half of it by heart. Reflecting upon the Holy Script was even considered irreligious and unauthorized; people should simply believe what they were taught, and this maxim was rigorously carried out.
Having enjoyed some fruit, we had to assemble at seven o'clock in the morn¬ing on our mat, which had been rolled up during the night and was now swept clean, and had to await the arrival of our severe lady teacher. Until she arrived, we whiled away the time to our heart's content with wrestling, boxing, jumping, climbing the railings which was life endangering, and other favourite amuse¬ments of the children's world. We set a watch at the bend of the gallery, who by simulated coughing announced the teacher's arrival from afar. In no time we were all sitting on the mat, an image of the greatest innocence, and only when her steps came near, did we rebound like India rubber balls, to shake hands respectfully with the dreaded one and to wish her good morning. She always carried the detested bamboo cane in one hand and a large brass inkstand in the other. We stood in file before her until she had taken her seat; only then were we permitted to follow this example. All of us sat cross-legged oh the mat, flocked together in a circle around the teacher.
She now would begin to recite the first sura of the Kuran, the Muslim Lord's prayer as it were. We prayed in chorus after her and concluded with the well-known Amin (not Amen). Then we repeated what we had learned the day before, and after that We were given a new piece for reading or writing. Lessons regularly lasted until about nine o'clock, and then, after breakfast, again till about noon, the time of the second prayer.
Each of us was allowed to bring some of his slaves to school to take part in the lessons; they sat at some distance behind us, while we grouped ourselves as we pleased, for there were neither fixed places for us or division in different forms. People had not the faintest notion of school reports, which a few times every year occasion feverish excitement in this country. If someone made par¬ticularly good or bad progress, distinguished himself particularly through good or bad behaviour, this usually was reported orally to the respective mothers and to our father. From the latter the lady teacher had the explicit order to punish us
 
severely, if there was any cause. And our great wildness obliged her to use 'the evil bamboo cane.
Besides reading and writing, we were taught a little arithmetic, numbering up to one hundred in writing and up to one thousand orally; what is beyond that is believed to be from the evil one. With grammar and orthography not much pain was taken, and the rather complicated Ilnahu [grammar, from Ara¬bic al-nabw] was only acquired by much reading over the years. At home I never heard of such sciences as history, geography, physics, mathematics or how they are all named let alone that I learned them. It was only in this country [i.e., Germany] that I had the pleasure to become acquainted with all these fields of knowledge. But it will remain an open question to me whether, with the little wisdom laboriously acquired here, I am now better off than the others over there. That I have never been more deceived and swindled than in the time of my greatest knowledge, this is certain. Oh you happy people at home! Not even in your dreams do you surmise all that is connected with holy civilization!



Martha Thabi 
My GOD, WHY HAVE YOU FORSAKEN ME?
Malawi 1890 Ngoni (Zulu)

1. My God, my God,
Why have you forsaken me, my Lord? Behold, you are far away from me. Help me, my Lord.
2. My God, I cry
Day and night,
But you do not answer me.
3. I am but a worm.
I am not a righteous person.
I am unworthy of you, my Lord.
4. Do not move away from me Since troubles are very near.
But you are my strength, my Lord.
5. My God, come
back to me, my Lord. Help me.
6. Hear my cry. I cry to you, Father,
Answer my prayer.



Jessie Nyagondwe 
LET NOT YOUR HEART BE TROUBLED
Malawi 1890s Chitumbuka

Let not your heart be troubled By all earthly things.
Instead rejoice
That we shall sing to Jesus.
Refrain:
We will sing
To Jesus, our Redeemer. We will sing to Jesus.
We will all rejoice in Him.
Do not pile up
Treasures on earth.
They perish while you hoard them. Weevils and rust destroy them all.
Refrain
Instead, you should store
The enduring treasure in heaven, Where Christ, Our Leader,
is gone.
Refrain
Around us and within us
Are foes who would destroy us. Protect us from them, Jesus, And we will gladly praise you.
Refrain
On earth many sorrows Press upon us daily.
Lord, free us in your mercy
From all these foes.
Refrain



Bwanikwa 
TEN TIMES A SLAVE
Zambia 1895 Chiluba

I, Bwanikwa, was born on the banks of the Dindie, a small river in our Luba-land.
Our part of the country was thickly populated, and our principal chief was Goi-Mani. My father's name was Kankolwe. My mother was called Mikomba. I was one of a family of five. Our only brother had died; four girls remained, of whom I was the second oldest.
My father had a dozen wives. His head-wife was the daughter of chief Katumba. She was an important woman. At the time I refer to, the head-wife had just died. According to Luban custom [my father] was mulcted for death dues. He was ordered to pay three slaves, as compensation for his wife's death, and to ensure inheritance by the dead wife's sister. They did not produce a sister to take the dead woman's place till the death had been paid for to the relatives. Three slaves were demanded, and my father could only raise two.
One of his four daughters had to be handed over to make a third, and I was chosen. I was the second oldest, as I said, and my father loved me. When he handed me over to my master, he said to him as we parted: "Be kind to my lit¬tle daughter; do riot sell her to anyone else, and I will come and redeem her." As my father was unable to redeem me, I was left in slavery.
My father did not come to redeem me, and my master sold me to some of Msidi's people who were out man-hunting. I was sold for a packet of gun¬powder, worth two shillings and sixpence, and was taken to Chifuntwe's village in the Balomotwa country. At that time I was small, unable to walk.
It appears that my master had, at this time, offended the principal chief, and was ordered to pay up several slaves. Amongst those slaves given to pay for my master's crimes, I was handed over. Thus I was sold again. The chief to whom I was given in payment of a fine handed me to one of his warriors as wife, saying, "Take her as yolk wife, she's young." After a while he said "She's only a young girl, and I don't want her:" He sold me to a man named Mukoka for a gun. Mukoka bought me, with another woman and child, intending to sell us later to the Biheans. He took me as his wife. I bore him a child which only lived three days. His other wives were kind to me. Though he sold many other slaves to Biheans, he never sold me, nor did he threaten to do so.
I lived with Mukoka•till Msidi's death and the break up of his power by the Europeans. At this some of us slaves saw our chance and fled. We scattered. Men, tired of Msidi's despotic rule, would take some or other woman slave, and
 
both would head north, south, east, or west, in search of freedom and a new start in life. When possible, each headed for the old homestead.
A well-known elephant hunter and fellow-slave in the same village, whose name was Kabongo, took me, and we ran off east. Our old master set out in search of a new home and village site. We crossed the Luapula River to Kazeinbe's to try and begin life anew. Chief Kazembe cast his eye upon me and asked Kabongo to give me to him for a wife. Kabongo refused. We left Kazembe's capital, came back west, and settled in Sakungami village. We lived and cultivated there for two years. Some slaves heard of our old master having built at the Luisi River and suggested Pour returning together. My husband refused at first but afterwards agreed to join the party.
When Chief Mukoka saw me come back, he said, "My wife's come back." On hearing this, Kabongo was angry, and said, "No, I won't let you take her from me; she's my wife." Thus the altercation grew, and they almost came to blows.
Kabongo had killed a bull elephant and intended to give the tusks to the chief. However, owing to Mukoka taking me from him, he hid his ivory in the forest and threatened to kill some of Mukoka's people in revenge. Mukoka was afraid of Kabongo's threats and sold me to a band of West Coast slavers who had just turned up. Said he, "If I'm not going to have her, neither shall he." He sold me to the Biheans, and I started, a slave bound for the West Coast. Imme¬diately after I left, Mukoka caught Kabongo and killed him.
On the road west I took refuge with Inansala, Msidi's sister, who hid me in one of her houses. Shortly after, she was caught and eaten by a lion. On account of her death I was afraid, came out of hiding, and traveled to the mission sta¬tion. At this time I had never heard the Gospel and was very ignorant.
I met a man named Wafwilwa, who, seeing me alone, asked me to be his wife. I refused at first, but he persisted and would not leave me. I had need of a protector, so I finally gave in and became his wife. We lived near to the mission at Lufoi. Wafwilwa, with two others, was sent to build a mission house on Lake Mweru. We women accompanied them there. On arrival he was sent to the Government Post Office with mission letters, and Wafwilwa insisted on my going with him. His reason for my going soon appeared.
On arrival at Kalunguisi, in British territory, he sold me secretly to some Arabs for calico. I overheard whispered conversation among the Arab traders. Said one of them, "She's very pretty" (Mzuri sana). I became suspicious and said to them "Who is pretty?" "Oh," they said, "we're just talking." Then I heard someone say, "She's the slave they're buying." I became afraid and began to cry. Shortly afterwards the Arabs came to me and said, "You're our slave now Go into the house and sleep; it's night." Then I knew I had been sold again. I refused to enter the house, but my refusals were met by force.
I was pushed inside the house, and a woman kept guard over me. Wooden bars were put across the doors to prevent my escape. The woman was soon fast asleep, while I kept awake. I got up in the middle of the night, removed the
 
bars, and, getting out, ran to the soldiers' headquarters in the government loca¬tion. I hid there. In the morning the Arabs, finding their slave had escaped, went to Wafwilwa and made him disgorge his ill-gotten gains.
The soldiers threatened to report the matter to the magistrate, but Wafwilwa paid them up and begged them to say nothing. They then handed me back to him; we recrossed the lake and rejoined our friends. Mishi-Mishi was then a Christian, and on hearing my story was angry with Wafwilwa. I refused to live longer with him.
Mr. Campbell then came from the West Coast, via Lufoi. A man in his car¬avan named Kawimbe, nephew of Chief Mwemmena, asked me to be his wife. I married him. Wafwilwa, seeing this, sent in his account for my keep while I was with him, and Kawimbe paid him a gun. Thus I was enslaved for the tenth and last time.



E. May Crawford 
FACE TO FACE WITH WANGU WA MAKERI
Kenya 1913 English

The most interesting event after our arrival at Weithaga was the welcome extended to me by the Kikuyu women. Led by their chieftainess, Wangu [wa Makeri], they ascended the hill in hundreds to perform a dance in my honour. Nothing would content them but that I must be dragged into the center of the ring, to endure with as cheerful a countenance as I could muster the din of their savage song and the smother of dust raised by their feet. A presentation of a sheep followed, and after this Wangu seemed to claim me as her particular friend! She is quite a remarkable person in her way, and is the only female chief we have ever known. Probably she would never have been recognized by the Government in this capacity had not her husband, to whom the authority of sub-chief was originally given, proved incapable, while Wangu demonstrated herself to be "the better man of the two"! With well-oiled body, draped with skins, smeared with red clay and grease and ornamented with an amazing quan¬tity of beads, Wangu is well able to hold her own as the "leading lady" of the country!
Every Kikuyu woman wears a "tailor-made" costume, the goatskin clothing being shaped and sewn by the men; and she is very, particular about the cut, although the fashion is unvarying from year to year! Her skirt hangs long behind, terminating in two points or tails, and is folded across a short leather apron in front. A goatskin cape, suspended by a string from one shoulder, cov¬ers the upper part of the body but is usually laid aside during manual work. The women have their own methods of dressing the skins, which are rubbed with fat until quite soft and pliable, when they are frequently smeared over with red clay. White or coloured beads are sometimes sewn into the seams and round the edges of these garments, thus rendering them ultra-stylish!
It is strange how dearly an African loves a decoration of beads! The Kikuyu women are sometimes quite heavily laden with them. Large hoops of beaded wire hang from their ears; and bead necklaces, varying in number according to the estimation in which they are held by husbands or lovers, are strung around their necks. Young girls are decorated with a frontlet of beadwork over their foreheads and a kind of corset to blue and white beads just below the waist.
 
Beads are not, however, the only ornament. Coils of brass wire, kept brightly shining, are worn on the arms and above the ankles, if the woman be a person of any importance. If she has attained the rank of mutumia (a married woman with grown-up children), she must keep her head entirely shaved and also insert huge brass rings in the distended lobes of her ears. The younger women shave the front and back of the head, leaving only a circle of hair on the crown. As soon as a girl is able to take a part in the general work of the village, her hair is cut in this curious way, and the wretched custom of distorting the ears begins. Three punctures are made in the upper edge, into which small sticks of equal size are inserted. A much larger hole is made in the lobe, which is continually stretched by the introduction of chunks of wood. These are again and again replaced by wedges of a larger size until the lobe is so extended that it will sometimes reach to the shoulder. Necklaces are often threaded through the ears, making it somewhat difficult and painful to turn the head. Little girls sel¬dom wear anything but a small leather apron, and a string of beads round the neck.
As I sat in the center of the ring of merry women and girls dancing in my honour, I could scarcely realize what strenuous lives they led, but this I found out by degrees, as we watched them come and go day by day and visited them in their villages. Though practically slaves from childhood they bear life's burdens very philosophically and are generally ready with a laugh and a jest. See the tiny girl of four or five years trotting bravely along with a baby almost as big as her¬self on her back! Look at her again as she follows her mother with a bundle of sticks poised on her slender shoulders or a little gourd filled with water from the river! As she grows year by year the burdens will become gradually heavier and heavier, but her muscles will be so strong that she will usually carry them cheer¬fully. We have seen women carrying loads of firewoods that weighed quite 180 lbs.! The small Kikuyu maiden is early taught to handle her little cultivating knife in the gardens, digging and weeding all day long beside her mother; then after assisting to carry home the produce of the fields, she must help to cook the food for the lazy men folk at sundown! If not engaged in the fields, the women may be seen busily employed at home, pounding maize in a large wooden mor¬tar, or grinding the corn on a smooth slab of stone, by means of a smaller stone which they work to and fro with their hands. This latter process, being accom¬plished in a kneeling position, must be very fatiguing.
Sometimes when taking a walk in the cool of the day, we have come upon a number of women pounding sugar-cane for the brewing of native beer. For this a large log of timber is felled, and as it lies on the ground a long row of holes resembling mortars is carved on its surface. Pestles of hard wood are prepared, about six feet in length and each weighing seven or eight pounds avoirdupois; with these the cane is pounded to a pulp, which is then carried to a group of men sitting near, whose duty is to wring out the juice. This is poured into large gourds and allowed to ferment. A still more intoxicating drink is made from honey. Pottery is an important industry which is entirely in the hands of the
 
women. They will travel many miles to procure the right kind of sand, and it is really remarkable with what skill they will fashion the large cooking-pots which are so much in demand.
A Kikuyu woman scarcely knows what idleness means. Her leisure moments are occupied with the manufacture of string bags which are used for carrying the garden produce or the ripe corn from the fields. Even when she has become habituated to attending the mission service on Sunday, she may be seen in her place in church busily plying her fingers as she pulls the threads in and out, while a half-finished bag lies on her lap. The twine for these bags is made by a method which would hardly commend itself to friends at home, namely, by chewing strips of wild ramie fiber in the mouth before twisting them into string.
Although the women have no share in the discussion of public affairs, yet in buying and selling they are experts. Were it not for the native markets which are held every fourth day at recognized places all over the country, there would be indeed be little to sharpen their wits. But the constant bargaining over the exchange and sale of their wares and garden produce tends to somewhat develop their otherwise dull and torpid minds. The market is a place of social reunion, and between the hours of eleven and twelve in the morning, when the fair is at its height, it presents a seething mass of black humanity:
Of recreation the women and girls have little, but on moonlight nights they come out to dance on the open spaces outside the homesteads, and the hillsides echo with the shrill trilling of their peculiar song. It is only as a woman advances in years that she may hope to meet with much respect from the other sex. Young men are expected to step out of the path to allow an old dame to pass, if it be a very narrow one. The head wife of a member of the Kiama (coun¬cil of elders) is permitted to be present at the tribal councils; of this privilege, however, the women seldom avail themselves: During a woman's existence she passes through the following stages: (1) Karegu (little girl);) (2) kiregu (big girl); (3) muiretu (marriageable girl); (4) muhiki (bride or young marriedwoman); (5) wabai (mother of young children); (6) mutimia (mother of children who have attained their majority); (7) kiheti (old woman).



Anonymous 
BINTI ALI TILE CLEVER
Kenya 1914 Kiswahili

Once upon a' time there was a Sultan and his Wazir, and that Sultan had seven children, all sons, and that Wazir had seven children, all daughters.
Those daughters of the Wazir had no mother; their mother had died, and they were very poor.
The sons of the Sultan used to laugh at the daughters of the Wazir, saying, "You poor people, what do you eat? It is our father who pays your father his wages, and how do they suffice for you seven people who are in one house? You poor creatures, you have not even a brother to help you."
Now those girls used to plait baskets and sell them. They lived for many days like that, their work being to cry every day, and when they came out of school they used to plait- and sell their baskets. Till one day the youngest daughter, who was called Binti Ali, was sitting with her father, and -she said to him, "What advice have you to give us, father?"
Her father asked her, "Why, my child?"
She said to him, "We are only seven girls; we have neither husbands nor brothers. Should anything happen to you, who will be our headman? Father, you must arrange to 'have a ship built for me, and it must be ready in the space of three years."
Her father said, "All this wealth, where shall I get it from, that I may build a ship?"
She answered him, "God, the merciful, will provide."
In the morning the Wazir arose and went to the Sultan and- said to him, "Give me help, for my youngest child wants a vessel built for her."
The Sultan brought out nine lakhs of rupees and gave them to his Wazir. Then the Wazir sought for workmen and told them to build a ship and have it ready in three years' time.
Now that child, Binti Ali, was very beautiful, more beautiful than all her
 
sisters. Many men had come to seek her in marriage, but she had refused them, saying, "I am poor; my father has not wealth to suffice for my wedding."
At the end of three years the ship was ready, and her father called her, "Eh, my child, Binti Ali." And she answered him, "Lebeka, father," which means "Here I am" in the language of today; but long, long ago, Lebek was the name of the god worshipped by the Phoenicians at the temple of Baal-lebek (Bal bek).
Her father said to her, "Your ship is finished and ready for you."
So she went to see it and found that it was built in a wondrously fine way. When she returned she said to her father, "Now you must find me a captain and sailors, and you must put on the vessel enough food to last three years."
So he found a crew for her and provisioned the ship and returned. Then she said, "Father, now you must buy for me fine raiment, a sultan's turban, a shirt and coat, and a sword and dagger. Also you must get for me sandals of gold braid and two men's gold rings."
So her father searched for one hour and half a second and then returned and said, "My child, the things you want are ready."
Then he asked her, "My child, where are you going? Tell me."
She said, "Father, have you no understanding? I am going to the country of the Sultan Makami."
Her father said to her, "My child, you are already lost. Do you not know that a woman may not go to the country of Sultan Makami? Any other than a male who enters the country is put to death."
Binti All said to him, "Father, have you no wits, you, a full-grown man, who rules all this land? Do you not see that all these clothes which you have brought for me are men's clothes? want to go and see Makami's country.),
Her father said, "I do not approve of this journey you are setting out upon."
His daughter replied, "What coma to me is in the hands of God."
Then she entered the bathroom and washed herself, and when she came out she was dressed as a man. Now that girl had wisdom more than all her sisters, and she was well read in the Qur'an.
She took her dog, whose name was Atakalo, and she entered the ship and set sail.
She travelled day and night, for three years, and there in the midst of the ocean she taught her dog till it attained great learning.
At the end of the third year she drew near to the country of Sultan Makami, and she ordered a salute to be fired, and the people on land replied also with a salute.
When her vessel drew near, the Sultan's son rowed out to meet her. He climbed bn board, and there he saw a handsome Arab youth sitting on the deck.
Binti Ali arose, and they greeted one another after, the fashion of men: "Peace be with you," "And with you peace."
She went ashore with that son of the Sultan, and they came to the palace. 
When they came to the palace he said to his father, the Sultan, "How shall 
we see that this is a man and not a woman? Let us give him very hot gruel and
 
if it is a woman she will not be able to drink it, and then we will kill her."
So they ordered food to be brought, and slaves were told: "Take matting and platters and very big trays and cups of gold, and place them ready for the feast."
When the food was ready they brought gruel for that foreign youth to drink, and it was very hot.
Binti All took it and threw it away, saying, "Am I a woman, that you bring me cold gruel like that?"
So they prepared fresh gruel, steaming hot, and gave it to her and she said, "Ah, that is more fit for a Sultan's son to drink."
So she put it beside her, and her dog Atakalo blew on it, so that it quickly cooled, and she drank it.
Very good food was then brought, and they fed, and she returned to her ship.
The Sultan then said, "To-morrow we must take this foreigner to my store of jewels and ornaments, and if it be a woman we will surely see, for she will take delight in women's jewellery."
All night long Binti Ali taught Atakalo what he should do, and in the morn¬ing the Sultan's son came to fetch her.
He said, "My father says that I am to take you to his store and show you his treasures."
So they went to the Sultan's treasure-house, where they showed her neck chains and nose pendants, anklets and bracelets, women's gold rings and ear ornaments.
She. said, "Have you in this country no men's ornaments, that you should show me nothing but women's jewellery?"
So they brought her to the next store, wherein were gold-hilted daggers and all manner of arms, swords, and pistols, guns, and muskets. These she admired, and meanwhile Atakalo went and swallowed all the gold ornaments he could find and took them to the ship, till he had brought much wealth aboard.
Then the Sultan's son said to his father, "Now what shall we do so that we may kill her if she is a woman?"
So the Sultan said, "Make him take off his turban, and then we will surely see by the manner in which he ties it whether it is a woman or not."
So the Sultan's son said, "Now will you not wash?"
Binti Ali said, "Thank you, I have already bathed on board."
So he said, "If it is only your face, I beseech you to wash."
So she said, "Certainly; but first you and your father must wash."
So they took off their turbans and began to wash, when suddenly there was a shout from outside: "The Sultan's house is on fire."
Behold, that dog Atakalo had brought a brand and set fire to the palace. Then the Sultan and his son and all the people in his house rushed out, With their turbans in their hands, to see what was the matter and help put out the flames.
Binti Ali went down swiftly to her ship and got on board, and meanwhile Atakalo had run round and bored a hole in the bottom of every boat and ship in
 
the Sultan's harbour. Then Atakalo came back to her vessel and said, "Mistress, I have finished."
So she weighed anchor and changed into her woman's clothes. The Sultan and his son and all the people, when they saw that she was sailing off, rushed down to the beach and tried to row out and stop her, but every boat they launched sunk; and so they were not able to get to her.
Then they saw her come up on the deck.
Then, changing her clothes as a woman, she sang-
"Makami, behold my bracelets and rings. See my anklets, Makami. Aha, behold!
See the chain for my neck of beautiful gold. Behold now my ear-rings and nose-stud see. Lola, Makami, lola, look well at me.
I'm Binti Ali, the Wazir's daughter;
I came, Makami, from over the water. We are seven in all, the last born am I.
Farewell, Makami, for I bid you good-bye. Lola, Makami, lola, farewell."
Then she said to the captain, "Set sail, and let us return home."
When she arrived home there in her town her father and sisters were hold¬ing a great mourning for her, for they said, "Our youngest one has now been away many years; surely she must be dead."
When they saw her their hearts were very glad, and a feast was made for her for the space of three days. And the riches she brought with her, which her dog Atakalo had taken from the Sultan's treasure house, were brought to land; and when he saw them her father rejoiced greatly:
After a space of ten days she said to her father, "I know that Sultan Makami's son is making a plan to get me. If he comes here and asks for me in marriage, do not refuse him, but agree. My cleverness, which I have in my heart, is that which will save me."
One day the Sultan of Makami's son arrived and came to the Wazir and said, "I want your daughter, Binti Al, in marriage."
So the Wazir agreed.
Binti Ali took a large pumpkin and filled it with honey and placed it on her bed, and she herself got under the bed.
That night the Sultan of Makami's son came into her room and said, "Ee, woman," and she replied, "Lebeka, master."
Then he said, "You, woman, you think that you can come to our country and cheat us, pretending' that you are a man. Behold, to-day is your last, so make profession of faith quickly, so that you may be prepared for death."
Binti All said, "I testify there is no God but one God, and Muhammad is the prophet of God."
 
So he drew his sword and struck a blow which cut the pumpkin in two, and then he went out quickly and got on his ship and sailed away. When he came to look at his sword, to wipe the blood off, he found no blood but only honey stuck all over it.
This is the end of the story. The tale comes from the Wazir and his daugh¬ter, the last born, who was called Binti Ali the Clever.



Jane Elizabeth Chadwick and Eva Chadwick 
MY STUDENTS
Kenya circa 1920; 1935 English

Amongst my first school girls at Butere were two, Kitandi and Mapesa, who came together a walk of over two miles. I noticed that whenever one was absent the other did not appear. On asking the reason I heard that both girls had been partly betrothed by their fathers to heathen men with several wives already; i.e. a couple of cows had been offered and accepted as part payment for the maidens; who however wished to be single wives of Christian husbands. But if either came the long walk to school without a friend to raise alarm, she fully expected to be seized and carried off to the undesired husband, as the Bahanga custom was.
Kitandi was a strapping big lass and often came carrying on her shoulder a devoted four-year-old cousin, who would cry if left behind, but could not walk too far; and as time went on a 'group of young girls from all along that road attached themselves to the first two so that they made quite an addition to my flock. Both Kitandi and Mapesa advanced quickly and were admitted to the catechumen's class, and Kitandi, always the leader, became a pupil teacher. Early in the days of the great war, I had seven of these bigger girls helping to teach besides the two Baganda women who had answered my appeal for help from the center.
As thousands of Kavirondo boys were month by month drafted to the war, a few as recruits in the army but most of them as carriers, and after my brother had followed them down to "German East [Africa]," the girls, with fewer to cook and work for at home, came in increasing numbers to learn; especially on Sundays we often had more than three hundred in the girls Sunday-school alone so that when the drum sounded for service I could only send the Senior class on to church with the adults and the boys, while with the juniors we car¬ried on a little service of our own, with a great deal of singing. These Bahanga, unlike the Baganda, were naturally a very musical people and loved to sing in parts. During this time of crowded school my friend Kitandi disappeared for a fortnight, and I was told that her mother was very ill and Kitandi was nursing her day and night, the two other daughters, heathen, leaving all the work to her. Then one day they told me that the mother was dead and Kitandi dying. I had seen her a few days before, tired but well. So immediately after school I called my car-boys and set out to their hill where I found the heathen funeral customs being carried on in even unusual wildness. Wailing was loud and continuous; men would from time to time climb up the poles of the little grain stores and fling themselves down yelling; one would rush into the cook-house, seize a water pot or cooking-pot, and fling it into the midst of the circle in the court¬yards, smashing it to atoms; another caught a fowl and wrung its neck; yet another tore a cloth from a woman's back and tore it to shreds. All these hyster¬ical doings supposed to propitiate the spirit of the departed as being done in her honour. My inquiries as to Kitandi only elicited, "She isn't here." At least I per¬suaded a young boy to guide me a quarter of an hour's walk on a track over the
 
bill to the house where she had been deposited. They told me that when the mother died her relations started the wailing and called the girl to join in; she refused and knelt down to pray in a corner. Again they called her to help wrap up the body and found that, worn out with sorrow and watching, she had fainted. Imagining that the spirit had struck her down because she refused to wail, some of them lifted her up, carried her unconscious to the nearest Christ¬ian house, and flung her in the doorway saying, "Take your Christian." She had a severe illness after that, tended only by one little brother who would come to fetch soup and medicine for her and by the Christian young man into whose but she had been so unceremoniously thrown.
After the war was over, when our boys, diminished in numbers, returned, I soon became distinctly anxious over my pupil teachers, who came late instead of punctually, dull instead, of cheery, shrugging their shoulders when asked to put out the reading sheets or slates, cross or falling asleep in their classes. I began to wonder whether we were to have an outbreak of sleeping sickness, and whether the government doctor would come and examine them! Then one day a man catechist came and asked me, "Do you think that it is wise what these girls of yours' are doing?" and I begged him to tell me what it was. So it came out that the boys during the campaign had been much laughed at by the more civilized coast boys both because their faces showed the old tribal marks, or scars, of heathen days, and because most of them could not read. And on their return they found that their sisters had got ahead of them. So as many of them had acquired lamps or lanterns each held one of my pupil-teachers and made them start night classes, fifteen or twenty youths to each lamp, and some of these carried on up to 3.00 a.m., the lassitude of the girls thoroughly accounted for. The help of the men catechists made some other arrangements, and the girls were told only to teach by daylight in the kraals, say for an hour before sunset. Kitandi, a few months later had got together a village gathering of sixty under a big tree, some old women and little children who could not come so far as Butere to learn. She was later married to a teacher of the Luo tribe who at this time of writing (1935) is in the divinity school preparing for ordination, and she is the mother of five children. When her probation time was over and she asked me to select a name for her in baptism, I chose Lydia, remembering the women in faraway Philippi who gathered by the riverside for prayer.

Shortly after my mother's death my sister was visited one evening by a group of those wild young men on their way home from the war, of whom she has written in another place. This group came from a village on the foot-hills of Mount Elgon, and they told her their needs bluntly enough: "We just learnt one thing at the war, that is that we must have the whole men's learning so give us a missionary." My sister had to tell them sadly that it must be a long time before that could be. The Archdeacon, who had been in charge of the whole district, was dead. The mission was depleted, few young recruits arriving. They must be patient, but they were anything but patient; after a few minutes debate among themselves they turned to her again. "Then we will take you."
But again she must refuse. She tried to explain to them that she was in a position of trust, left alone to try and keep her brother's work together until it should be possible to fill his place. Greatly as she was touched by their even thinking, it possible that a woman should teach them, she could not go.
"Give us one of your girls."
But it was unthinkable that she should send one of her young, newly taught Christian maidens away in the hands of men like this. They must be patient, they must indeed. Yet she thought of them and their crying need for a long time that night. She would see them again in the morning and assure them that she would do all she could to help them. But in the morning they had vanished—and they had taken Lydia with them.
There was nothing she could do at the moment. Her work must go on. But when, a few days later, one of the nearest clergy cycled over to see her, hopeful of a pleasant visit and refreshing cup of tea after his long hot ride, he found himself, instead, promptly dispatched on a longer and hotter journey in search of Lydia.
He had considerable difficulty in finding the village, but once there no diffi¬culty at all in locating Lydia. She was established in all honour in the largest but in the place, surrounded by most of the children and as many of the women as could possibly be spared from digging, intent on the rudiments of that most difficult art of reading.
The education of the young men had not yet begun; they were still fully occupied in running up at all speed a good sized school house in which all sections of the community, might take their turn of instruction, and where per¬haps, some day they might all meet in worship. When they had learned what worship meant. Lydia was entirely mistress of the situation. She was a born teacher and here was a whole village hungering to be taught. What could be happier?
The missionary only mounted his bicycle and rode, wearily homewards. There was nothing he could do, except indeed to resolve very earnestly that he would second all Miss Chadwick's efforts to secure a teacher as quickly as pos¬sible for a village among the foothills of Mount Elgon.
I wonder whether, in after days, Lydia even introduced her Luo Padre to her own first parish.



Siti binti Saad 
KIJITI
Tanzania 1920s Kiswahili

Look, look you all, what Kijiti has done,
To take a guest and give her the runaround.
He took her into the bushes and brought her back dead. We left home without permission;
We had our gin in our basket.
The dance was in Chukwani; death awaited us in Sharifumsa.
Kijiti said to me, let us go woman.
If only I had known, I would not have gone. Kijitiyou will kill me for one peg of gin.
The judge, presiding, was angry.
He §aid "Bloody fools!" to Kijiti's witnesses,
And sentenced Sumaili and Binti Subeti to prison.
These matters are strange, however you look at them. Kijiti killed someone who was pregnant.
He crossed the river but the witnesses drowned.
Kijiti, I advise you not to go to Dar es Salaam; You will encounter there a man with a razor.
Everyone is cursing you that you may get elephantiasis.



Siti binti Saad 
THERE IS NO DAMAGE
Tanzania 1920s Kiswahili

There is no relationship; I am so and so.
The word, like a sin, is branded on the chest.
The name is yours, old man, and the stone is on your head; The stone is on your head.
Stop your meanness and robbing of the poor,
Especially those who speak not, the ignorant of the ignorant. Their pen always is ink on their thumbs,
Is ink on their thumbs.
Pilfering is wrong; stealing from the government. Their books are open, with all signatures,
A matter of long ago, comes under scrutiny,
Comes under scrutiny.
Friends, don't be duped; hark my words.
Maintain caution; don't let it leave your hearts.
Let little satisfy you; that which is your right, clerks; That which is your right, clerks.



Siti binti Saad 
WITH MISSIVE I AM SENDING You
Tanzania 1920s Kiswahili

Oh, missive, I am sending you, to my confidant, To my generous Lord, who has no compare. The stones have turned well, with speedy peace. I pray respectfully, with my hands beseeching: Rid us of enmity and secret envy.
Prayers I have read; may they reach the heavens, May they reach the heavens.
Your compassion, oh, Lord, let it be with you.
Every time I look at them, I discover them in my heart. I pray for health and freedom from suffering,
And freedom from suffering.
Oh, Prophet, stand up with the angels in heaven, Together with Bi Fatuma and Hussein her grandson. Oh, Prophet, it behooves you, since God mandated you To pray for the human race in heaven and earth,
In heaven and earth.



Siti binti Saad 
DO NOT EXPOSE A SECRET
Tanzania 1920s Kiswahili

Do not expose a secret
With colored ink.
You have to understand:
If you have many problems, You self-destruct
Through your own ignorance.
Give the poison to the cat Who has many lives,
Not the goat;
You will kill it,
For every lecher
Dies deprived.
Poor stars
In the clouds,
I never imagined
That you would be unfaithful. Come back, my love,
And end my grief.
Show me.
I swear I can't sleep;
Quench my desire by action. Being apart from him
Makes me crazy.
A ripe fruit must be picked.
A dry leaf is withered by the sun.
The one with a scar may still be hurting. My love, don't agitate me.
Love does not last without tolerance. Understand, speed is not progress.
The sweetness of sugar
Does not surpass that of sugarcane. Sugarcane has juice
Dripping down on you.
With sudden sweetness,
The soul melts.
A decorated cup Is good for tea;
Add some milk
And sugar aplenty. When you depart, Another is waiting.



Communal 
SONG OF THE COFFEE GIRLS
Kenya 1922 Gikuyu

Frilipu let him be cursed.
It is they who have caused to be taken away the Chief of the girls
who live in the coffee.
Koinange let him be cursed.
It is they who have caused to be taken away the Chief of the girls
who live in the coffee.
Josiah let him be cursed.
It is they who have caused to be taken away the Chief of the girls
who live in the coffee.
Kinyanjui let him be cursed.
It is they who have caused to be taken away the Chief of the girls
who live in the coffee.



Luiza 
I WANT A DIVORCE
Zambia 1922 English

I am the wife of defendant Luka. I married him two years ago. He paid one shilling as earnest of dowry. I have married him according to our cus¬tom. I now want to divorce defendant because he has beaten me three times and I don't like him and also because he hasn't yet paid dowry. I co-habited with defendant for two months after we were first married, and last June I came with defendant before the M.C. Feira and claimed a divorce, but the M.C. refused my application and ordered defendant and I to live together for six months because there was no sufficient grounds for divorce. I still refused to live with defendant and ran away.
Shortly afterwards defendant went away to S[outh] A[frica] to work. He is still away but has written a letter to his brother Gutinyu who is appearing for him offering to divorce me if I pay 30 [shillings] being the cost of clothing he has provided me with during the time since we first married. Defendant has only provided me with one large cloth and one small one of [one] yard only. These cloths would not cost 30 [shillings]. I refuse to pay 30 [shillings] for this because he co-habited with me for two months. . . I cooked and worked for defendant all the time until he went away to work. I have not got 30 [shillings]. Both my mother and father are very sick and cannot appear. They have heard about the letter and refuse to pay 30 [shillings] to defendant



Zeina binti Mwinyipembe Sekinyaga 
CIVILIZED MOTHERHOOD
Tanzania 1926 Kiswahili

Please allow me to join the community of your readers, in your esteemed "coun¬cil," and permit me to exchange a few ideas with the gentlemen who are your' readers and get some answers to my questions.
1.	In all the things that are being said, intended to enable Africa to prosper in future, I have yet to hear of a black African man who endeavors to speak for women and defend us so that we may be treated justly and well in our pres¬ent state of oppression. I read Mr. Peter Kiobia of Bukoba, who has a repu¬tation for despising women, and by following up his endeavors to the end,1 realize that he wrote because he knows how to write not because he intended to. If this is indeed the situation, will men alone really manage to make Africa of the future prosper? I beg all of you who desire to see your countries succeed in the light of this civilization to read my words as a favor to me, oh blessed ones.
2.	Many traditions of black people in the world were not codified into law, hence I feel they were in the dark. Among the many savage practices that existed, the most enduring was to despise women, deprive them of their rights and enslave them. All men demand many wives, so that they will not have to work in the fields or on construction sites. When a man has slaves, such tasks are done by the slave and the man's wife. Now, judge for your¬selves whether it is a mark of respect for the wife to toil with the slaves. At home we black women have no rights, except by chance. The man goes wherever he wants without	his wife. Sometimes he has his dinner 
there and comes home and says: "Today I do not want to eat!" Or maybe because of his wanderings, he returns later than his usual time and when he finds the food cold, raises hell more terrifying than the thunderbolt. Nor is justice observed in such cases, for if the wife tries to defend herself by claim¬ing that it is not her fault that the food has gone cold, the man retorts: "Shut up, after all you are my property, I can do anything I want with you!" For these and other reasons, we women are whipped worse than stubborn don¬keys. I won't tell you of the insults and bad words that we receive from our husbands. Anyone who is kind at heart can realize the bitterness we black women carry in our bosons: trembling every hour, worried every minute, forever steeped in sadness. These afflictions, which have hounded us for many centuries of savagery, have forced us not to trust men, so that very often we meet to denounce and speak evil of them. These problems, which are like a cancer, have come into existence because, when we marry, the man has to pay something to our parents. Indeed this custom is no different from slavery. For whoever buys a slave must pay, and likewise whoever wants a woman to be his wife must pay, and sometimes the value of the slave is higher than that of the wife. This shows that, to her husband, the black woman is at the same level as the slave and is equal to a chattel, such as a cow, a goat, or a chicken.
3.	Being sold by our parents lands us in slavery; deprives us of our dignity, and renders us devoid of any rights before our husbands. For does a chattel have rights vis-a-vis its purchaser? That is why when men are beating their wives, they often speak to them the words I have cited above! Know ye that we women are bereaved without a death, are hungry in the midst of plenty, and are dead while still living.
4.	Had these things been mere primitive acts, i.e., [customary] law, we would ignore them if the men who have converted to any of the religions would treat us justly as ordained by their religions. Yet, the worst offenders in doing bad things to women are these converted husbands! Now, didn't these reli¬gions create laws to help us and ensure that we have dignity and are justly treated? I would like this to be clearly explained to me,
5.	In anticipation of that dawn of Africa of the future, I request you, our par¬ents, to abolish this custom which is worse than a cancerous sore, this custom of selling your daughters to whichever man you choose! Why should the parents' permission be necessary for marrying off the daughter? Why do you demand "wealth" before the marriage of your daughter? Isn't the love of the betrothed enough to cement their union permanently? Or does it mean that without money your daughter has no valid marriage? Understand that this custom is primitive and whoever follows it, even if he or she sleeps on learned books, is primitive too.
6. To my fellow women, I say this: Shall we not be obedient daughters to our parents if we refuse to be sold? Shall we not earn the title of "wife" if we are not auctioned to wooers as they are used to auction us? Whether it is mahari or kilemba, mafungu (Wabehe), vigumo (Wagogo), it is a traditional custom not a law. Can't it be abolished by a new law? Why was a man allowed to become "master" of many wives, but a woman not allowed to become "mistress" of many husbands? And who indeed invented this custom? Mr. Cock and Ms. Hen claim that the custom emanated from them. Without our contribution, would the world be as full [of people] as it is today? Women, let us not devalue ourselves, let us understand that we are precious, superior beings of great value, for through us the Almighty God creates human beings whom we bring out [into the world] imbued with life. So from now on let us know that we are the "mothers" of the civilized who will teach the Africans of tomorrow. Let us always keep our eyes open, force ourselves to go to school, even if our elders won't like it. Let us turn a deaf ear. to them, let us go to school, and let us learn civilized motherhood. And you men, allow your wives [to study], even if it is only once a day, for it is better to get [a little], even if it is an "a," than to miss everything. The greatness and dignity of our country will not be manifest unless we women acquire what the schools can offer. And you men, if you want civilization, you have first to educate your wives and daughters, the mothers of the civilized, so that they may be on the same level with you, even if you are still the bosses. If you do that, the noise and wrangling at home will cease, and the words "divorce me" as used at present will no longer be heard. You husbands will be happy to see your wives, and you wives will be joyous to see your husbands. Certificates of divorce, which are stacked up in all government offices, will be returned to where they came from.
I hope I will be excused and will receive an answer to these questions that I have posed today.



Mwana Hashima binti Sheikh 
A PETITION
Kenya 1930 English [Kiswahili]

He said that he knew that I could not afford this as I was a woman, but there was no help but to send me, and as Sheikh Omar bin Mataka is my brother, there was no one who could talk with him as well as I. He had prepared a boat to take me to Siu and from there to send some men to the mainland with my letter to my brother asking him to come and make peace. And he said that if peace was made and guns were returned to Government and he (Omar) came to Siu, the Government would be glad because they did not want trouble to be made on the mainland— "so if this is done and the Government becomes grateful, you will be given a reward." I followed Mr. Rogers' requests, and I left with my son and husband for Siu, and from there I sent my husband and son and my nephews to the mainland with my letter to my brother Sheikh Omar bin Mataka who wanted his sons to be released from prison and I sent a letter to Mr. Rbgers asking him to release the sons of Sheikh Omar from prison, and let them stay at Lamu until Omar returned to Siu and to take away Akida Abdullah bin Salim from Siu because fitina [intrigue] increased when he was at Siu, and many people had moved from Siu to the mainland owing to his fitina. Mr. Rogers released the sons of Sheikh Omar b. Mataka and allowed them to stay at Lamu, and he took away Akida Abdullah b. Salim from Siu. I informed my brother that his sons were released and that they would stay at Lamu till he came back to Siu and gave up all the guns; that was the Government's request. He agreed with my advice. . . . So I came back to Lamu, and he sent me all the guns, and I handed them over to Mr. Rogers who had them broken and put them all in the sea in front of the Customs House, and Sheikh Omar bin Mataka came back to Siu. Mr. Rogers gave me a certificate for my work which was taken by the Interpreter to Mr. Harding, Salim bin Azan, to show to Mr. Harding. Afterwards Mr. Rogers called me to go to take my certificate as it had been returned by Mr. Harding, and he informed me that he would start soon from Lamu for Zanzibar. But at that time I was ill . . . and my son was away, and when Mr. Rogers went away I kept quiet because I had means. My husband was alive, and my son was employed. But now I am an old woman, I am ninety years of age and ill; my husband has died, and my son lost the Government's work owing to illness, and he cannot do any other work; so I became poor. For this reason I have commu¬nicated to the Government my request, and I hope that the Government will remember me and give me something.
The above mentioned information was known to all the people of Siu and others who have served the Government since they were young men till they become old men and retired. Also I made peace at Jongeni but failed to com¬plete it because the inhabitants were bad people. As far as I know if anyone serves the Government, he is usually given something as reward or pension, and I did a great work for the Government and I hope that the Government will not cast me aside, for I am an old woman now, of old age and poor.



Nyambura wa Kihurani, Raheli Warigia wa Johanna, and Alice Murigo wa Meshak
LETTER OPPOSING FEMALE CIRCUMCISION
Kenya 1931 Gikuyu

To Local Native Council South Nyeri District, 25 December 1931
1.	The Council of the NO ya Tuiritu met here at Tumufumu because we've heard that the people in the country have prayed for female circumcision to be allowed by the government.
2.	And we of the Ngo ya Tuiritu heard that there are men who talk of female circumcision, and we get astonished because they (men) do not give, birth and feel the pain and even some die and even others become infertile, and the main cause is circumcision.
3.	Because of that the issue of circumcision should not be forced. People are caught like sheep; one should be allowed to cut her own way of either agreeing to be circumcised or not without being dictated on one's body.
4.	Because Agikuyu say women cannot give birth without being circumcised, and because Gikuyu girls have given birth to children even having not been circumcised, what then is the reason for circumcision? We cannot see any reason.
5.	Because among the Agikuyu, if a girl fails to give birth, she can be returned to her father even if she is circumcised, where then is the profit for circumci¬sion? It can only be given by one who advocates circumcision.
6.	Now what we ask from the government, because Gikuyu men have more power than women, is that women be assisted in their complaints by the government to avoid further suppression.



Lusi kyebakutika
THE WORD PROSTITUTEBAS CONFUSED US
Uganda 1932 Luganda

Sir,
I am humbly trusting that you will be able to publish my letter to the readers.
Sir, I am asking why a woman is called a prostitute. For what reason? When a woman is called a prostitute; what should a man be called? The woman who is called a prostitute, with whom does she go? Does she just go to the streets and get men to go with her? Yes, it is a man who tells a woman to sit on his bicycle that they may go to his home. If you refuse and say that a woman is not to be picked from the streets, the man says, "Aren't you a prostitute?" Then he drives away hooting, to go to Kampala, where there are many women who are beauti¬ful and smart, and he will show off his car, and they will all come, and he will choose which women to take. When he starts the car, he tells them how he has met a backward woman, maybe she was not from town, "I found her at Bwayise, she is from Bulemezi." Then they would all laugh.
You know, a man is the real prostitute. Sometimes, you are walking on the road, when you see a man coming from a house. Then he calls you, "Madam, come and have some tea and rest. I will take you later where you are going." Yet the resting he is talking of is not good. Therefore, was it the woman who called the man? It is a pity!
Sir, the man also needs to be called a name. The word prostitute is too much in use for women alone. When somebody sees a woman without a husband, she is called a prostitute. Perhaps one should consider the proverb: "Gwe busulako aciuma gwe bukyalira," meaning a person who is more of a fool blames the one who is less foolish. Therefore, a person who is more of a prostitute blames another. It reminds me of a man who divorced his wife for being a prostitute, and yet in his own house women are his pillows because they are too many and there is nowhere for them to sleep, but he lays his head on some of them.
Yours, sir,
Lusi K. Kyebakutika
Makerere Kyadondo, 17 June 1932



Emily Mkandawire 
SHOULD WOMEN BE EDUCATED?
Malawi 1933 Chitumbuka

Friends, listen to me now! Some elderly women, girls, elderly men, and drunkards say discouraging and painful things about educating girls. They say, "Why should you girls go to school? Where will school lead you? If you fail, what can school profit you?" "Just get married! All your friends are married, and some even have children! You are just wasting your time." "Do you really believe school would make you useful?" "Do you really think that women should be educated?"
Sometimes you answer them, "We are not- supposed to rush into marriage. We are supposed to get a formal education first and then later, after much thought, get married."
One day I was reading an article by Maria Gondwe in Vyaro na Vyaro where she argued that waiting patiently is important so that God can choose someone who is suitable with whom we can share our lives in a Christian marriage and family. "Yes, waiting is good and yields sweet results! My friend do not be attracted by clothes on the body, hats on the head, and shoes on the feet. Such appearances might deceive you, and yet on the inside, a man may be like a bit¬ter fruit! Before you say 'yes' to any man, discover whether he is well-behaved, trustworthy, and educated. To such a man, were he even an orphan, you could still say 'yes.'" 
All of us know friends who married drunkards. These women are forced to brew beer. You can see smoke coming from their houses, the women dark with soot from the beer pots, their eyes as red as fire because of the smoke! See the crowds gathering at their houses and hear the noises! Some of the noise comes from the singing and dancing of those who are drunk, some of them covered in beer residue. Others actually fall asleep naked. Some beat each other to death with sticks, producing more chaos, as if these houses were filthy dens of hyenas or pigs.
Would any of you, friends, recommend such a life? Please try to accept mar¬riage proposals only from those who are trustworthy and respectable. Take time to know the man before making a decision. Let those who are happily married be your examples. Well, certainly you have heard my opinion!



Mothers Union Members 
A LETTER TO THE BISHOP
Uganda 1934 Luganda

N.A. C. Mengo
August 29, 1934
Your Lordship,
We members of the Mothers Union of Buganda are writing this letter to you with humility to put before you these matters of painful and serious concern to us. We have received with serious note the news that His Majesty the Kabaka of Buganda has chosen his man, Mr. N. Senkonyo, the Mumyuka of Singo County, and promoted him to head the bigger and more important subcounty of Sabawali in Kyagwe County. This gentleman, however, does not deserve any more promotion; rather, he should be gradually phased out for the reasons given below.
That gentleman was sued by his wife in the High Court at Kampala on grounds of adultery, mistreatment, and cruelty when he took to his home two other women, Naomi and Wanyana, with whom he ganged up to subject his wife to extreme abuse: The judge upheld the wife's complaints and granted a divorce and maintenance of twenty shillings per month, on these grounds. Truly, Your Lordship, we know these things well because we sent twelve of our members to closely observe the proceedings in this case. So, Your Lordship, what reason is there for the promotion of an administrator who was publicly found at fault in a case of that nature? How can an administrator of that kind fairly judge people who indulge in actions like those? If that man is not pro¬moted, is there any great loss to the Buganda government?'
But if he has been selected just like any other person, we, as the mothers of
 
the nation, demand, Your Lordship, that you convey to the government these complaints of ours. For, Your Lordship, if such matters are not given serious consideration, it will be a matter of great disgrace. The nation will simply perish, and all the hopes of Buganda will be dashed, never to be realized.
We, as the mothers of the nation, who are deeply concerned about our nation, humbly beg you, if you are unable to handle this matter, Your Lordship, to introduce us to the Provincial Commissioner, [of the] Buganda, or the Gov¬ernor himself, before this gentleman is confirmed, so that, through our chosen representatives, we can further explain our feelings of pain and shame as a nation and as Christians. We are, Your Lordship, your respectful members of the Mothers Union, Buganda.
Lusi Kafero		Secretary of the Union at Natete
Everini Segobe	Secretary of the Union at Kibuye
Tabisa Sonko	Secretary of the Union at Kungu
Naomi M. Binaisa	Secretary of the Union at Namirembe



Chauwa Banda 
FIGHTING FOR MY CHIEFTAINCY
Malawi 1936 English [Chichewa]

To Chiefs: Casaba, Chamita, Chitukula, Masula, Kamgunda and Njewa
I am inviting you to a meeting to be held on Monday, August 18, 1936. The main agenda of the meeting is to bid farewell to you my children because Native Authority Mazengera is threatening to have me deported from this area. He intends to do this because I attended the Abanda meeting at Nathenje though I sent prior notification to both the Native Authority and the District Commissioner at the Boma [district administrative center]. Also, he maintains that he does not want my children, [who are] other Abanda chiefs, to visit me. Mazengera further informed me that, as Native Authority 9f this area, he has the right to appoint Mdzinga [chiefs]. This remark surprised me because, even during the time of our ancestors, it was unheard of for a Phiri to get involved in matters concerning a Banda chieftaincy. In addition, Mazengera stated that I should not have gone to the Boma when the D.C. [District Commissioner] called Abanda elders to give an account of our history. He feels that I went there to back bite him. This is why he is expelling me from Chilenje, the land of my ancestors. As such, make plans to attend this important meeting so that you can appoint a Mdzinga, your uncle, before I leave this area. If you acknowledge that I am your mother, please attend the meeting.
Your mother,
Chauwa

Native Authority Mazengera sent for me on Sunday, the 9th of August 1936. His messenger found me unwell. I was suffering from headache and aching of feet. I told the messenger that I was unfit to travel any distance and asked him to spend a night at my village so that we could set out for Mazengera's the next day. The messenger said, "The order that I have been given by N.A. Mazengera is that it does not matter you are sick. I must take you away from your village." While discussing this the sun set and the messenger mercilessly took me away from my village and made me sleep at Kunthole' village, a village that is about 800 to 1000 yards from mine. We arrived there after •dark. The next day,
Monday, we set out for Mazengera's. Certain men of my clan followed me, some found me on my way, others just after 1 arrived at Mazengera's.
I entered his court where a great number of people were sitting. N.A. Mazengera said, "This is the very woman whom I want to see mostly. She is the woman who intends to take away my nkbanju [garment of chieftainship]. I warn you that you and your Abanda men should be aware. If you don't know me, you will know me now. You went to Natherije and held a meeting of the Abanda, and again you went to the D.C. when the Abanda were called. What were you telling the D.C.? I know you meant to hold a secret detraction against me, therefore, prepare you and your men. I will make you eat hot chillies. I hear that your Abanda men are often visiting your village, such as Chimutu of Chiwamba, Kalumba of Chitsime and many others. I don't want these men to come to your village at all. If they continue coming, know that I will collect Abanda of all sexes that are in my land and get them exiled to an unknown country:
I tried to explain the subject of the meeting at Nathenje. . . . My simple explanation was like to kindle a flame of fire in his heart, and he scolded me heavily. Being a woman, I feared greatly because when he was speaking, he kept hitting the book on the table. One or two of my men tried to explain in the same manner but in vain. . . . He continued threats of doing away with the Abanda in his country. I am the descendant of Chauwa, the founder of the Abanda clan, and the order of Mazengera is rather hard for one living to observe, unless in a grave where a person is buried alone.





