Sultan Fatima binti Muhammad Mkubwa 
PEACE AND SECURITY
Tanzania 1711 Kiswahili

In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate,
I, the ruler of Kilwa, Sultan Fatima, daughter of Sultan and former ruler Muhammad Mkubwa, dictate this letter to our friend Mwinyi Jumaa, son of the late Sayyid Mwinyi Kaje:
My greetings. This letter is to inform you that I have seen the governor of the Imam and the emissaries of the Imam, Sheikh All ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn Mtibarak al-Eukhayt. They told me that we should be given a letter from our Lord the Imam saying that we should write to all of our subjects who are in the Kerimba region and tell them that they should come to Kilwa where God's peace prevails.
Anyone who wants to should come, and if she or he come with their posses¬sions, no one will rob them. Those who want to sell Islamic foods should come. There is nothing to worry about. If a person intends to come to his or her home, he or she should come. There is peace, and no one will seize that person's property. Tell this to all the people who are there, except the Europeans. They are the enemies of the Imam. Anyone who is a Swahili person will not be ill-treated by an Arab.
The end, in peace.



Mwana Kupona binti Msbam
FROM A MOTHER'S ADVICE AND PRAYER: AN EPIC POEM
Kenya 1858 Kiswahili

1.	Come near, my dear daughter, You, a young inexperienced woman, Listen to my advice
That I hope you will remember.
2.	I have been ill
The entire past year,
So ill that I could not speak Even a word of advice to you.
3.	Come to me and hear me, Come with paper and ink, For I have a story
That I want to tell you.
4.	Now that you are near me,
Say Bismillahi, In the Name of God. Pray for the Holy Prophet
And also his companions.
5.	After you pronounce the name Of God Almighty,
We will pray for a future
That God may grant us.
6.	The human being is nothing And the world is not ours, For certainly, there is no one Who will ever be immortal.
7.	Take my advice, my child, And my blessings also,
For God will protect you And keep you from evil.
8.	Take this charm that I give to you, Tie it securely with a cord, Honor and treasure it. May you care for it always.
9.	I will string for you a precious amulet Of pearls and coral beads
To adorn you elegantly.
May it glow upon your neck.
10.	1 would like to give you a pendant, One precious, perfect, without fault, To wear around your neck.
You shall see its benefits.
11.	If you remember my advice, My child, you will never suffer. You will walk across this world, And later you will enter paradise.
12.	First, remain loyal to your religion: Fulfill the Faradhi that is required, Follow the Sunna that is advised. This is your obligation.
13.	Second, be virtuous: Have a sweet tongue
That you may be respected Wherever you may go.
14.	Be trustworthy.
Hold firm to your beliefs. Avoid those who are unjust; Shun their company.
15.	My daughter, take special care When you meet the powerful: Wherever you may meet them, Quickly show them respect.
16.	As they approach,
Rise to meet them cheerfully, And when they depart,
Escort them as they leave.
17.	Be amusing when you speak, Without being malicious. Do not argue needlessly, Lest people despise you.
18.	Speak jokingly with people; Use pleasant and joyous words. Better to be quiet
Than to use words that spite.
19.	Avoid those matters You do not understand; Even aimless talk and grumbling—Avoid these, I beg of you.
20.	Stay away from the slaves
Except when doing chores,
For they may harm your reputation. Perhaps I have said this before.
21.	Avoid the company of the ignorant, Who do not behave properly,
Showing no generosity toward others. Keep away; do not approach them.
22.	Darling, listen to what I'm saying: A woman requires five approvals If she is to rest
In paradise and on earth.
23.	These are of God and the Prophet, And of one's father and mother.
The fifth is of one's husband,
As you have heard many times.
24.	You should have your husband's approval As long as you are together,
So that when you are separated,
His approval will have been given.
25.	Should you die before him, His approval should be with you. You will carry it with you.
It will show you the way.
26.	On the day of resurrection, Your husband's wish will be granted. He will be asked what he wills, And all will be as he wishes.
27.	If he wills paradise for you, Certainly, you will enter.
If he wills that you perish in hell, Certainly, there you shall go.
28.	Live with him courteously. Do not drive him to anger.
Should he be angry, do not respond; Make every effort to remain silent.
29.	Be in harmony with him; Deny him not what he desires. Do not quarrel with him;
If you do, you will be the loser.
30.	If he leaves, bid him farewell.
When he returns, welcome and honor him, Then prepare a comfortable place
Where he may rest.
31.	When he sleeps, do not stir about, But lean towards him, and stroke him. He should not lack
The enjoyment of a cool breeze.
32.	If he dozes while leaning on you, Move not, nor raise your voice. Sit still, stir not,
Lest he be startled awake.
33.	When he awakens, care for him. Offer him a fine meal. Also care for his body: Massage him and wash him.
34.	Shave him, caress him, Trim his beard,
Burn incense around him From morning until evening.
35.	Care for him as though He were a very young child, Who could not yet speak;
Anticipate his needs and desires.
36.	Amuse him until he's entranced. Do not reject his command.
If he behaves disgracefully,
Surely God will take revenge for you.
37.	My child, do not be slovenly. Act as you see best,
But never ignore, not even once, Matters of cleanliness.
38.	Bathe often and carefully.
Braid your hair,
Adorning it with jasmine blossoms; Also put them on your bedclothes.
39.	Dress yourself beautifully As though you were still a bride. Wear ankle bracelets
And bangles on your wrists.
40.	Hang amulets and pendants Always around your neck.
Smooth your body with fragrance Of perfumes and sweet oils.
41.	Wear rings on your fingers And henna on your palms. Put kohl around your eyes And also on your eyebrows.
42.	Keep your house neat To lift your husband's status, And when company enters, Praise him to them.
43.	Whatever he desires,
Follow that same desire.
What he disapproves,
Be not the person who brings it to him.
44.	If you must go out,
Seek his permission.
If he does not give it,
Stay at home; do not argue with him.
45.	Follow his guidance To ensure his approval.
Do not stay outside,
Especially after ten at night.
46.	Do not engage in idle chatter. Do not unveil yourself.
Cast your eyes down in humility. Your expression should be shy.
47.	Quickly return to your home To keep your husband company. Prepare a place of comfort
Where both of you may sleep.
48.	Praise your husband.
Make his reputation known.
You should not compel him
To undertake what he is not able to do.
49.	Receive whatever he gives you With joy in your heart.
What he does not willingly do, It is not for you to tell him.
50.	When you encounter his face, Smile and laugh.
Do what he tells you
Unless it is against God.
51.	My darling, do not be quick to speak. Ask me, your mother.
I was married for ten years;
Not once did we disagree
52.	Your father married me
In joy and in bliss.
We never embarrassed each other All the days we were together.
65.	Listen to my words, beloved daughter; I beseech you not to ignore them.
You surely will see their benefits
In heaven and here on earth.
66.	That is the end of my words Of advice to you, my daughter. Now I will pray to God
To grant my prayer.
67.	However much we talk, Human beings are worthless. God is the one who is able To destroy and to save.
68.	I pray to You, Almighty, To aid me
In what I say
And in what I have not said.
69.	All that I have said, God, accept from me;
And I pray to you again, Dear God, provide for me.
70.	Look after my children
And my younger brother.
May their names become renowned And known in other places.
71.	God, take care of my family,
And the children of my family members. May they extend throughout the world In goodness and prosperity.
72. Those of the Islamic faith,
God, please bless them. Fulfill their desires
And make them happy.


Emily Ruete, also known as Princess Salma of Zanzibar
A ROYAL CHILDHOOD IN ZANZIBAR
Tanzania 1886 German

As long as the child does not have enough strength to wear sandals (the wooden ones for girls and women are called hubkab, the leather ones for boys and`men are tailed watje), it runs' about barefooted. Because the watje are con¬siderably lighter to wear than the kubkab, very, small girls initially are made to walk on the former until they have acquired the necessary skill to wear the ku*bkeib forever. Neither children nor adults of both sexes wear stockings; only more aristocratic ladies use them now and then when riding, as custom requires one to cover the ankles.
Already at the age of two to four months, two or three slaves, besides the wet nurses, were allotted to the child by our father. From then on they remained its property. The older it grew, the more slaves it received for its personal atten¬dance. If one of them died, our father replaced him, or gave an appropriate sum of money. Up to 'a certain age, little girls wear boys' caps in the house.
Until his seventh year each prince at home stays among the women. At this age the mosaic rite [circumcision] is performed on him. Ceremonies of course play an important role on this occasion, the closing of which, after the child's recovery, forms a peculiar festivity, in which all dignitaries and high officials are allowed to take part. This deed, if in any way possible, was enacted in the coun¬try and in the presence of our father. A public entertainment, usually lasting for three days, also accompanied this.
 
From this time onwards, every boy received a quiet mare of his own. His escort could take their mounts from the stables, where a couple of hundred Arabian horses were standing. In this way the boy, at a very early age, learns to ride well and acquires a very outstanding skill and nimbleness, which only a trained circus rider is otherwise credited with. Since we had neither a true sad¬dle nor stirrup, it required of course much more dexterity to gain a firm seat than in this country. Our father followed a characteristic custom when his sons ran into some mishap while out riding. In that case not only they themselves but also their escort could expect punishment. For our father assumed that the latter, with the tight warrants and instructions which he had conferred on them, must have behaved much too indulgently towards the princes.
Not one of us was spoiled in any way. My father's high sense of justice and unparalleled generosity was combined with an equally firm consistency which did not know any weakness. All of us had to obey our teachers and educators on the strength of their word [be they Arabs, Abyssinians or simple negroes). If occasionally we complained to our father, we certainly left his presence in tears or shame for our behavior. This severity taught us the reverence due to such people, and with increasing age the appreciation of how deep our moral indebt¬edness to them was also grew.
The nurses, even if they had served as such for a very short time, were partic-ularly honoured and enjoyed special esteem for the remainder of their life. By birth they were always slaves, but as a rule they were freed in reward of their fidelity and devotion. The black wet nurses especially distinguished themselves by extraordinary fidelity and attachment. Even the most cautious mother might in all confidence leave her child with the wet nurse, who usually considered her¬self as its second mother and acted accordingly. How the lack of interest and the heartlessness of the wet nurses in these parts stand out in stark contrast with this! Often enough have I felt myself forced to give, on a public walkway, a good talking to such a character, totally unknown to me, for her brutal treatment of the little thing entrusted to her. This contrast between the wet nurses of these parts and our Arab ones may possibly be explained by the fact that the former are forced by their poverty alone to entrust their own beloved child to complete strangers under much sacrifice. Only for money's sake they serve masters; whether the child to nurse is called Tom or Dick is indifferent to them; their thoughts and feelings naturally linger with their own child. And which mother would hold this against her!
How very different is a black nurse's attitude towards her mistress's child entrusted to her. For years she is in the latter's service, she may even have been born in her house; it then is understandable that she does not have many private interests, that she makes those of her masters her own. Moreover, there is the most important fact that a black wet nurse only very rarely, if ever, is required to part with her child, but may quietly retain it. The wet nurse's child then receives the same nourishment as its little master or mistress, the same milk soup, part of the same fowl, etc.; the same goes for the bath, and the used dresses fall no
 
less to its lot. When its mother stops serving as a wet nurse, her child continues to be the playmate of her second foster-child. Though remaining a slave, it is always preferred to the rest of the slaves, and only bad people offend against this attachment to the foster-brother.
The black wet nurses, however, have one very bad habit. They know how to tell the little children of three to five years old very dreadful stories and fairy¬tales. Partly to amuse them, partly also to keep them quiet. The lion (simba), the leopard (tshui), the elephant (tembo), and the numerous witches (watchawi) occupy of course the first place in these often also for adults horrifying fables.
On the whole, rearing a child in the south is unquestionably much easier than here in the north: above all, the everlasting colds and everything they, usu¬ally entail are rare. Notwithstanding all indolence, children there are very inde¬pendent and adroit, for they are allowed to play and jump freer and more unconstrained (both in space and in dress) to their heart's content. Though gymnastic exercises are completely unknown, it is no rarity that a boy of ten to twelve in playing takes a stiff run and leaps over one or even two horses. High jumping in general plays an important role, and everybody strives as much as he can to surpass the other.
Swimming in the sea was practiced no less eagerly, and everybody taught himself without any guidance. Shooting too began early and was pursued with great passion. Mock-fights were extraordinarily favored from youth onward many an hour was devoted to them. Though the boys went about armed to the teeth and carried as much powder and lead as grown-ups, one hardly ever heard of an accident caused by imprudence.
Up to a certain age only, the young princes, as already mentioned above, lived in their father's house. Then a house of their own was assigned to each to keep independently, as a rule with their mother if she was still alive. As maintenance he was granted by our father a certain monthly allowance, and then he had to "cut his coat according to his cloth," which was certainly matching the needs. At marriage, at an increase to the family, or also for exceptional conduct, he might count on an extra allowance, but in no other case. Only when our father's ships arrived annually with the new purchases, did all my brothers and sisters living outside the paternal house come with their families to receive each the share belonging to him, whether he needed it or not. If any one of them had the great misfortune of spending more than what his allowance brought in, it was never made easy for him to pay his debts; nothing was more hateful to our father, and the one who had brought this disgrace to himself was very much on his guard not to incur the same a second time.
If a war broke out, as unfortunately was so often the case in Oman, all the princes, the half-grown included, had to take the field too and to take part in the fight like any common man. On the whole, discipline was strict, but it only raised the respect and reverence of the sons for their father. As a child I often saw with astonishment how my elder brother, anticipating the slaves, hurried to put, in readiness the sandals my father had left at the door of his room. The
 
elder brothers appeared also in the paternal house several times a day, as soon as our father was present, and then took part in the meals.
There is but very little to say about the education of a princess; the first years it is the same as that of her brothers, with the exception that the latter at their seventh year obtain a much greater freedom outside the house. The only thing deserving mention at a princess's birth is that, in accordance with the hairdress in our country, a broad comb, generally of silver, is placed under the back of the newborn to give it a flat shape for later age. When a Princess is married to one of her cousins, who to be sure are more numerous in Oman than in Zanzibar, she of course leaves the paternal house in exchange for that of her husband. The former, however, the sole and real bulwark against all hardships of life, remains always open as a place to live. But if she prefers, she can also go and live with a brother. Every sister has her favourite brother, and vice versa; in joy and sorrow these two stick together and support each other by word and deed. As praise¬worthy and, for those concerned, as much a blessing as this habit was in such a numerous family circle as ours, it understandably created many jealousies among brothers and sisters, and it often required a strong character to overcome all these.
Often such a loving sister had to intercede with our father for some impru¬dence of her favourite brother, for he liked to favour his daughters and rarely left their requests unheard. To his elder daughters in particular he was extraor¬dinarily obliging; he usually went to meet them from afar and had them seated by his side on the sofa, while the grown-up sons and we little people stood respectfully before him.
Schooling (mdarse) is of very little importance for the Oriental in general and consequently for us too. In Europe school is at the center of State and Church, without distinction for prince and citizen; for both the formation of his character and his prospects for the future, the individual depends essentially upon it for his success. But in the Orient the mdarse is altogether a matter of secondary importance; for a good many people it does not exist at all. But before engaging in further discussions, I wish to say something about what we called school in our house.
At the age of six to seven, all my brothers and sisters, boys as well as girls, had,to enter the mdarse. We girls were only required to learn to read, the boys to read and write. For teaching there was at both Bet il•Mtoni and Bet it Sahel only one lady teacher, whom our father had sent for from Oman. When the teacher fell ill and was confined to her bed, there was always great joy among us; no replacement could be procured for her, and so we had holidays.
There was no specific schoolroom, lessons took place in an open gallery, to which pigeons, parrots, peacocks and ricebirds found free entrance. From there we also had a free view of the courtyard and were able to amuse ourselves with watching its busy life down there. The furniture of the schoolroom consisted of a single, immense mat only. Our school equipment was equally simple: we only needed a Kuran with its stand (marfa), a small inkstand with ink, a bamboo
 
quill, and a well-bleached shoulder-blade of a camel. The latter is the substitute for the slate; writing with ink on this is quite easy, and the nerves are certainly less assailed than at the scratching on the slate. Our slaves usually took care of wiping off the blades.
The first thing we had to learn, exactly as is done here, was the very compli¬cated Arabic alphabet. Then, for want of any other school-book, we started reading the Kuran with which, as mentioned above, writing lessons were con¬nected for the boys. When one was able to read a little, one joined the others who all read in a chorus and mostly very loudly. But that was all, for what is read and learned is never explained. Hence there was at most only one among thousands who understood word by word all the meanings and precepts of the Holy Script of the Muslims and who was able to explain them, though probably, eighty out of one hundred had learned half of it by heart. Reflecting upon the Holy Script was even considered irreligious and unauthorized; people should simply believe what they were taught, and this maxim was rigorously carried out.
Having enjoyed some fruit, we had to assemble at seven o'clock in the morn¬ing on our mat, which had been rolled up during the night and was now swept clean, and had to await the arrival of our severe lady teacher. Until she arrived, we whiled away the time to our heart's content with wrestling, boxing, jumping, climbing the railings which was life endangering, and other favourite amuse¬ments of the children's world. We set a watch at the bend of the gallery, who by simulated coughing announced the teacher's arrival from afar. In no time we were all sitting on the mat, an image of the greatest innocence, and only when her steps came near, did we rebound like India rubber balls, to shake hands respectfully with the dreaded one and to wish her good morning. She always carried the detested bamboo cane in one hand and a large brass inkstand in the other. We stood in file before her until she had taken her seat; only then were we permitted to follow this example. All of us sat cross-legged oh the mat, flocked together in a circle around the teacher.
She now would begin to recite the first sura of the Kuran, the Muslim Lord's prayer as it were. We prayed in chorus after her and concluded with the well-known Amin (not Amen). Then we repeated what we had learned the day before, and after that We were given a new piece for reading or writing. Lessons regularly lasted until about nine o'clock, and then, after breakfast, again till about noon, the time of the second prayer.
Each of us was allowed to bring some of his slaves to school to take part in the lessons; they sat at some distance behind us, while we grouped ourselves as we pleased, for there were neither fixed places for us or division in different forms. People had not the faintest notion of school reports, which a few times every year occasion feverish excitement in this country. If someone made par¬ticularly good or bad progress, distinguished himself particularly through good or bad behaviour, this usually was reported orally to the respective mothers and to our father. From the latter the lady teacher had the explicit order to punish us
 
severely, if there was any cause. And our great wildness obliged her to use 'the evil bamboo cane.
Besides reading and writing, we were taught a little arithmetic, numbering up to one hundred in writing and up to one thousand orally; what is beyond that is believed to be from the evil one. With grammar and orthography not much pain was taken, and the rather complicated Ilnahu [grammar, from Ara¬bic al-nabw] was only acquired by much reading over the years. At home I never heard of such sciences as history, geography, physics, mathematics or how they are all named let alone that I learned them. It was only in this country [i.e., Germany] that I had the pleasure to become acquainted with all these fields of knowledge. But it will remain an open question to me whether, with the little wisdom laboriously acquired here, I am now better off than the others over there. That I have never been more deceived and swindled than in the time of my greatest knowledge, this is certain. Oh you happy people at home! Not even in your dreams do you surmise all that is connected with holy civilization!


Martha Thabi 
My GOD, WHY HAVE You FORSAKEN ME?
Malawi 1890 Ngoni (Zulu)

1. My God, my God,
Why have you forsaken me, my Lord? Behold, you are far away from me. Help me, my Lord.
2. My God, I cry
Day and night,
But you do not answer me.
3. I am but a worm.
I am not a righteous person.
I am unworthy of you, my Lord.
4. Do not move away from me Since troubles are very near.
But you are my strength, my Lord.
5. My God, come
back to me, my Lord. Help me.
6. Hear my cry. I cry to you, Father,
Answer my prayer.


Jessie Nyagondwe 
LET NOT YOUR HEART BE TROUBLED
Malawi 1890s Chitumbuka

Let not your heart be troubled By all earthly things.
Instead rejoice
That we shall sing to Jesus.
Refrain:
We will sing
To Jesus, our Redeemer. We will sing to Jesus.
We will all rejoice in Him.
Do not pile up
Treasures on earth.
They perish while you hoard them. Weevils and rust destroy them all.
Refrain
Instead, you should store
The enduring treasure in heaven, Where Christ, Our Leader,
is gone.
Refrain
Around us and within us
Are foes who would destroy us. Protect us from them, Jesus, And we will gladly praise you.
Refrain
On earth many sorrows Press upon us daily.
Lord, free us in your mercy
From all these foes.
Refrain


Bwanikwa 
TEN TIMES A SLAVE
Zambia 1895 Chiluba

I, Bwanikwa, was born on the banks of the Dindie, a small river in our Luba-land.
Our part of the country was thickly populated, and our principal chief was Goi-Mani. My father's name was Kankolwe. My mother was called Mikomba. I was one of a family of five. Our only brother had died; four girls remained, of whom I was the second oldest.
My father had a dozen wives. His head-wife was the daughter of chief Katumba. She was an important woman. At the time I refer to, the head-wife had just died. According to Luban custom [my father] was mulcted for death dues. He was ordered to pay three slaves, as compensation for his wife's death, and to ensure inheritance by the dead wife's sister. They did not produce a sister to take the dead woman's place till the death had been paid for to the relatives. Three slaves were demanded, and my father could only raise two.
One of his four daughters had to be handed over to make a third, and I was chosen. I was the second oldest, as I said, and my father loved me. When he handed me over to my master, he said to him as we parted: "Be kind to my lit¬tle daughter; do riot sell her to anyone else, and I will come and redeem her." As my father was unable to redeem me, I was left in slavery.
My father did not come to redeem me, and my master sold me to some of Msidi's people who were out man-hunting. I was sold for a packet of gun¬powder, worth two shillings and sixpence, and was taken to Chifuntwe's village in the Balomotwa country. At that time I was small, unable to walk.
It appears that my master had, at this time, offended the principal chief, and was ordered to pay up several slaves. Amongst those slaves given to pay for my master's crimes, I was handed over. Thus I was sold again. The chief to whom I was given in payment of a fine handed me to one of his warriors as wife, saying, "Take her as yolk wife, she's young." After a while he said "She's only a young girl, and I don't want her:" He sold me to a man named Mukoka for a gun. Mukoka bought me, with another woman and child, intending to sell us later to the Biheans. He took me as his wife. I bore him a child which only lived three days. His other wives were kind to me. Though he sold many other slaves to Biheans, he never sold me, nor did he threaten to do so.
I lived with Mukoka•till Msidi's death and the break up of his power by the Europeans. At this some of us slaves saw our chance and fled. We scattered. Men, tired of Msidi's despotic rule, would take some or other woman slave, and
 
both would head north, south, east, or west, in search of freedom and a new start in life. When possible, each headed for the old homestead.
A well-known elephant hunter and fellow-slave in the same village, whose name was Kabongo, took me, and we ran off east. Our old master set out in search of a new home and village site. We crossed the Luapula River to Kazeinbe's to try and begin life anew. Chief Kazembe cast his eye upon me and asked Kabongo to give me to him for a wife. Kabongo refused. We left Kazembe's capital, came back west, and settled in Sakungami village. We lived and cultivated there for two years. Some slaves heard of our old master having built at the Luisi River and suggested Pour returning together. My husband refused at first but afterwards agreed to join the party.
When Chief Mukoka saw me come back, he said, "My wife's come back." On hearing this, Kabongo was angry, and said, "No, I won't let you take her from me; she's my wife." Thus the altercation grew, and they almost came to blows.
Kabongo had killed a bull elephant and intended to give the tusks to the chief. However, owing to Mukoka taking me from him, he hid his ivory in the forest and threatened to kill some of Mukoka's people in revenge. Mukoka was afraid of Kabongo's threats and sold me to a band of West Coast slavers who had just turned up. Said he, "If I'm not going to have her, neither shall he." He sold me to the Biheans, and I started, a slave bound for the West Coast. Imme¬diately after I left, Mukoka caught Kabongo and killed him.
On the road west I took refuge with Inansala, Msidi's sister, who hid me in one of her houses. Shortly after, she was caught and eaten by a lion. On account of her death I was afraid, came out of hiding, and traveled to the mission sta¬tion. At this time I had never heard the Gospel and was very ignorant.
I met a man named Wafwilwa, who, seeing me alone, asked me to be his wife. I refused at first, but he persisted and would not leave me. I had need of a protector, so I finally gave in and became his wife. We lived near to the mission at Lufoi. Wafwilwa, with two others, was sent to build a mission house on Lake Mweru. We women accompanied them there. On arrival he was sent to the Government Post Office with mission letters, and Wafwilwa insisted on my going with him. His reason for my going soon appeared.
On arrival at Kalunguisi, in British territory, he sold me secretly to some Arabs for calico. I overheard whispered conversation among the Arab traders. Said one of them, "She's very pretty" (Mzuri sana). I became suspicious and said to them "Who is pretty?" "Oh," they said, "we're just talking." Then I heard someone say, "She's the slave they're buying." I became afraid and began to cry. Shortly afterwards the Arabs came to me and said, "You're our slave now Go into the house and sleep; it's night." Then I knew I had been sold again. I refused to enter the house, but my refusals were met by force.
I was pushed inside the house, and a woman kept guard over me. Wooden bars were put across the doors to prevent my escape. The woman was soon fast asleep, while I kept awake. I got up in the middle of the night, removed the
 
bars, and, getting out, ran to the soldiers' headquarters in the government loca¬tion. I hid there. In the morning the Arabs, finding their slave had escaped, went to Wafwilwa and made him disgorge his ill-gotten gains.
The soldiers threatened to report the matter to the magistrate, but Wafwilwa paid them up and begged them to say nothing. They then handed me back to him; we recrossed the lake and rejoined our friends. Mishi-Mishi was then a Christian, and on hearing my story was angry with Wafwilwa. I refused to live longer with him.
Mr. Campbell then came from the West Coast, via Lufoi. A man in his car¬avan named Kawimbe, nephew of Chief Mwemmena, asked me to be his wife. I married him. Wafwilwa, seeing this, sent in his account for my keep while I was with him, and Kawimbe paid him a gun. Thus I was enslaved for the tenth and last time.


E. May Crawford 
FACE TO FACE WITH WANGU WA MAKERI
Kenya 1913 English

The most interesting event after our arrival at Weithaga was the welcome extended to me by the Kikuyu women. Led by their chieftainess, Wangu [wa Makeri], they ascended the hill in hundreds to perform a dance in my honour. Nothing would content them but that I must be dragged into the center of the ring, to endure with as cheerful a countenance as I could muster the din of their savage song and the smother of dust raised by their feet. A presentation of a sheep followed, and after this Wangu seemed to claim me as her particular friend! She is quite a remarkable person in her way, and is the only female chief we have ever known. Probably she would never have been recognized by the Government in this capacity had not her husband, to whom the authority of sub-chief was originally given, proved incapable, while Wangu demonstrated herself to be "the better man of the two"! With well-oiled body, draped with skins, smeared with red clay and grease and ornamented with an amazing quan¬tity of beads, Wangu is well able to hold her own as the "leading lady" of the country!
Every Kikuyu woman wears a "tailor-made" costume, the goatskin clothing being shaped and sewn by the men; and she is very, particular about the cut, although the fashion is unvarying from year to year! Her skirt hangs long behind, terminating in two points or tails, and is folded across a short leather apron in front. A goatskin cape, suspended by a string from one shoulder, cov¬ers the upper part of the body but is usually laid aside during manual work. The women have their own methods of dressing the skins, which are rubbed with fat until quite soft and pliable, when they are frequently smeared over with red clay. White or coloured beads are sometimes sewn into the seams and round the edges of these garments, thus rendering them ultra-stylish!
It is strange how dearly an African loves a decoration of beads! The Kikuyu women are sometimes quite heavily laden with them. Large hoops of beaded wire hang from their ears; and bead necklaces, varying in number according to the estimation in which they are held by husbands or lovers, are strung around their necks. Young girls are decorated with a frontlet of beadwork over their foreheads and a kind of corset to blue and white beads just below the waist.
 
Beads are not, however, the only ornament. Coils of brass wire, kept brightly shining, are worn on the arms and above the ankles, if the woman be a person of any importance. If she has attained the rank of mutumia (a married woman with grown-up children), she must keep her head entirely shaved and also insert huge brass rings in the distended lobes of her ears. The younger women shave the front and back of the head, leaving only a circle of hair on the crown. As soon as a girl is able to take a part in the general work of the village, her hair is cut in this curious way, and the wretched custom of distorting the ears begins. Three punctures are made in the upper edge, into which small sticks of equal size are inserted. A much larger hole is made in the lobe, which is continually stretched by the introduction of chunks of wood. These are again and again replaced by wedges of a larger size until the lobe is so extended that it will sometimes reach to the shoulder. Necklaces are often threaded through the ears, making it somewhat difficult and painful to turn the head. Little girls sel¬dom wear anything but a small leather apron, and a string of beads round the neck.
As I sat in the center of the ring of merry women and girls dancing in my honour, I could scarcely realize what strenuous lives they led, but this I found out by degrees, as we watched them come and go day by day and visited them in their villages. Though practically slaves from childhood they bear life's burdens very philosophically and are generally ready with a laugh and a jest. See the tiny girl of four or five years trotting bravely along with a baby almost as big as her¬self on her back! Look at her again as she follows her mother with a bundle of sticks poised on her slender shoulders or a little gourd filled with water from the river! As she grows year by year the burdens will become gradually heavier and heavier, but her muscles will be so strong that she will usually carry them cheer¬fully. We have seen women carrying loads of firewoods that weighed quite 180 lbs.! The small Kikuyu maiden is early taught to handle her little cultivating knife in the gardens, digging and weeding all day long beside her mother; then after assisting to carry home the produce of the fields, she must help to cook the food for the lazy men folk at sundown! If not engaged in the fields, the women may be seen busily employed at home, pounding maize in a large wooden mor¬tar, or grinding the corn on a smooth slab of stone, by means of a smaller stone which they work to and fro with their hands. This latter process, being accom¬plished in a kneeling position, must be very fatiguing.
Sometimes when taking a walk in the cool of the day, we have come upon a number of women pounding sugar-cane for the brewing of native beer. For this a large log of timber is felled, and as it lies on the ground a long row of holes resembling mortars is carved on its surface. Pestles of hard wood are prepared, about six feet in length and each weighing seven or eight pounds avoirdupois; with these the cane is pounded to a pulp, which is then carried to a group of men sitting near, whose duty is to wring out the juice. This is poured into large gourds and allowed to ferment. A still more intoxicating drink is made from honey. Pottery is an important industry which is entirely in the hands of the
 
women. They will travel many miles to procure the right kind of sand, and it is really remarkable with what skill they will fashion the large cooking-pots which are so much in demand.
A Kikuyu woman scarcely knows what idleness means. Her leisure moments are occupied with the manufacture of string bags which are used for carrying the garden produce or the ripe corn from the fields. Even when she has become habituated to attending the mission service on Sunday, she may be seen in her place in church busily plying her fingers as she pulls the threads in and out, while a half-finished bag lies on her lap. The twine for these bags is made by a method which would hardly commend itself to friends at home, namely, by chewing strips of wild ramie fiber in the mouth before twisting them into string.
Although the women have no share in the discussion of public affairs, yet in buying and selling they are experts. Were it not for the native markets which are held every fourth day at recognized places all over the country, there would be indeed be little to sharpen their wits. But the constant bargaining over the exchange and sale of their wares and garden produce tends to somewhat develop their otherwise dull and torpid minds. The market is a place of social reunion, and between the hours of eleven and twelve in the morning, when the fair is at its height, it presents a seething mass of black humanity:
Of recreation the women and girls have little, but on moonlight nights they come out to dance on the open spaces outside the homesteads, and the hillsides echo with the shrill trilling of their peculiar song. It is only as a woman advances in years that she may hope to meet with much respect from the other sex. Young men are expected to step out of the path to allow an old dame to pass, if it be a very narrow one. The head wife of a member of the Kiama (coun¬cil of elders) is permitted to be present at the tribal councils; of this privilege, however, the women seldom avail themselves: During a woman's existence she passes through the following stages: (1) Karegu (little girl);) (2) kiregu (big girl); (3) muiretu (marriageable girl); (4) muhiki (bride or young marriedwoman); (5) wabai (mother of young children); (6) mutimia (mother of children who have attained their majority); (7) kiheti (old woman).


Anonymous 
BINTI ALI TILE CLEVER
Kenya 1914 Kiswahili

Once upon a' time there was a Sultan and his Wazir, and that Sultan had seven children, all sons, and that Wazir had seven children, all daughters.
Those daughters of the Wazir had no mother; their mother had died, and they were very poor.
The sons of the Sultan used to laugh at the daughters of the Wazir, saying, "You poor people, what do you eat? It is our father who pays your father his wages, and how do they suffice for you seven people who are in one house? You poor creatures, you have not even a brother to help you."
Now those girls used to plait baskets and sell them. They lived for many days like that, their work being to cry every day, and when they came out of school they used to plait- and sell their baskets. Till one day the youngest daughter, who was called Binti Ali, was sitting with her father, and -she said to him, "What advice have you to give us, father?"
Her father asked her, "Why, my child?"
She said to him, "We are only seven girls; we have neither husbands nor brothers. Should anything happen to you, who will be our headman? Father, you must arrange to 'have a ship built for me, and it must be ready in the space of three years."
Her father said, "All this wealth, where shall I get it from, that I may build a ship?"
She answered him, "God, the merciful, will provide."
In the morning the Wazir arose and went to the Sultan and- said to him, "Give me help, for my youngest child wants a vessel built for her."
The Sultan brought out nine lakhs of rupees and gave them to his Wazir. Then the Wazir sought for workmen and told them to build a ship and have it ready in three years' time.
Now that child, Binti Ali, was very beautiful, more beautiful than all her
 
sisters. Many men had come to seek her in marriage, but she had refused them, saying, "I am poor; my father has not wealth to suffice for my wedding."
At the end of three years the ship was ready, and her father called her, "Eh, my child, Binti Ali." And she answered him, "Lebeka, father," which means "Here I am" in the language of today; but long, long ago, Lebek was the name of the god worshipped by the Phoenicians at the temple of Baal-lebek (Bal bek).
Her father said to her, "Your ship is finished and ready for you."
So she went to see it and found that it was built in a wondrously fine way. When she returned she said to her father, "Now you must find me a captain and sailors, and you must put on the vessel enough food to last three years."
So he found a crew for her and provisioned the ship and returned. Then she said, "Father, now you must buy for me fine raiment, a sultan's turban, a shirt and coat, and a sword and dagger. Also you must get for me sandals of gold braid and two men's gold rings."
So her father searched for one hour and half a second and then returned and said, "My child, the things you want are ready."
Then he asked her, "My child, where are you going? Tell me."
She said, "Father, have you no understanding? I am going to the country of the Sultan Makami."
Her father said to her, "My child, you are already lost. Do you not know that a woman may not go to the country of Sultan Makami? Any other than a male who enters the country is put to death."
Binti All said to him, "Father, have you no wits, you, a full-grown man, who rules all this land? Do you not see that all these clothes which you have brought for me are men's clothes? want to go and see Makami's country.),
Her father said, "I do not approve of this journey you are setting out upon."
His daughter replied, "What coma to me is in the hands of God."
Then she entered the bathroom and washed herself, and when she came out she was dressed as a man. Now that girl had wisdom more than all her sisters, and she was well read in the Qur'an.
She took her dog, whose name was Atakalo, and she entered the ship and set sail.
She travelled day and night, for three years, and there in the midst of the ocean she taught her dog till it attained great learning.
At the end of the third year she drew near to the country of Sultan Makami, and she ordered a salute to be fired, and the people on land replied also with a salute.
When her vessel drew near, the Sultan's son rowed out to meet her. He climbed bn board, and there he saw a handsome Arab youth sitting on the deck.
Binti Ali arose, and they greeted one another after, the fashion of men: "Peace be with you," "And with you peace."
She went ashore with that son of the Sultan, and they came to the palace. 
When they came to the palace he said to his father, the Sultan, "How shall 
we see that this is a man and not a woman? Let us give him very hot gruel and
 
if it is a woman she will not be able to drink it, and then we will kill her."
So they ordered food to be brought, and slaves were told: "Take matting and platters and very big trays and cups of gold, and place them ready for the feast."
When the food was ready they brought gruel for that foreign youth to drink, and it was very hot.
Binti All took it and threw it away, saying, "Am I a woman, that you bring me cold gruel like that?"
So they prepared fresh gruel, steaming hot, and gave it to her and she said, "Ah, that is more fit for a Sultan's son to drink."
So she put it beside her, and her dog Atakalo blew on it, so that it quickly cooled, and she drank it.
Very good food was then brought, and they fed, and she returned to her ship.
The Sultan then said, "To-morrow we must take this foreigner to my store of jewels and ornaments, and if it be a woman we will surely see, for she will take delight in women's jewellery."
All night long Binti Ali taught Atakalo what he should do, and in the morn¬ing the Sultan's son came to fetch her.
He said, "My father says that I am to take you to his store and show you his treasures."
So they went to the Sultan's treasure-house, where they showed her neck chains and nose pendants, anklets and bracelets, women's gold rings and ear ornaments.
She. said, "Have you in this country no men's ornaments, that you should show me nothing but women's jewellery?"
So they brought her to the next store, wherein were gold-hilted daggers and all manner of arms, swords, and pistols, guns, and muskets. These she admired, and meanwhile Atakalo went and swallowed all the gold ornaments he could find and took them to the ship, till he had brought much wealth aboard.
Then the Sultan's son said to his father, "Now what shall we do so that we may kill her if she is a woman?"
So the Sultan said, "Make him take off his turban, and then we will surely see by the manner in which he ties it whether it is a woman or not."
So the Sultan's son said, "Now will you not wash?"
Binti Ali said, "Thank you, I have already bathed on board."
So he said, "If it is only your face, I beseech you to wash."
So she said, "Certainly; but first you and your father must wash."
So they took off their turbans and began to wash, when suddenly there was a shout from outside: "The Sultan's house is on fire."
Behold, that dog Atakalo had brought a brand and set fire to the palace. Then the Sultan and his son and all the people in his house rushed out, With their turbans in their hands, to see what was the matter and help put out the flames.
Binti Ali went down swiftly to her ship and got on board, and meanwhile Atakalo had run round and bored a hole in the bottom of every boat and ship in
 
the Sultan's harbour. Then Atakalo came back to her vessel and said, "Mistress, I have finished."
So she weighed anchor and changed into her woman's clothes. The Sultan and his son and all the people, when they saw that she was sailing off, rushed down to the beach and tried to row out and stop her, but every boat they launched sunk; and so they were not able to get to her.
Then they saw her come up on the deck.
Then, changing her clothes as a woman, she sang-
"Makami, behold my bracelets and rings. See my anklets, Makami. Aha, behold!
See the chain for my neck of beautiful gold. Behold now my ear-rings and nose-stud see. Lola, Makami, lola, look well at me.
I'm Binti Ali, the Wazir's daughter;
I came, Makami, from over the water. We are seven in all, the last born am I.
Farewell, Makami, for I bid you good-bye. Lola, Makami, lola, farewell."
Then she said to the captain, "Set sail, and let us return home."
When she arrived home there in her town her father and sisters were hold¬ing a great mourning for her, for they said, "Our youngest one has now been away many years; surely she must be dead."
When they saw her their hearts were very glad, and a feast was made for her for the space of three days. And the riches she brought with her, which her dog Atakalo had taken from the Sultan's treasure house, were brought to land; and when he saw them her father rejoiced greatly:
After a space of ten days she said to her father, "I know that Sultan Makami's son is making a plan to get me. If he comes here and asks for me in marriage, do not refuse him, but agree. My cleverness, which I have in my heart, is that which will save me."
One day the Sultan of Makami's son arrived and came to the Wazir and said, "I want your daughter, Binti Al, in marriage."
So the Wazir agreed.
Binti Ali took a large pumpkin and filled it with honey and placed it on her bed, and she herself got under the bed.
That night the Sultan of Makami's son came into her room and said, "Ee, woman," and she replied, "Lebeka, master."
Then he said, "You, woman, you think that you can come to our country and cheat us, pretending' that you are a man. Behold, to-day is your last, so make profession of faith quickly, so that you may be prepared for death."
Binti All said, "I testify there is no God but one God, and Muhammad is the prophet of God."
 
So he drew his sword and struck a blow which cut the pumpkin in two, and then he went out quickly and got on his ship and sailed away. When he came to look at his sword, to wipe the blood off, he found no blood but only honey stuck all over it.
This is the end of the story. The tale comes from the Wazir and his daugh¬ter, the last born, who was called Binti Ali the Clever.




